Contents
Series
Title Page
Copyright
Preface
Chapter 1: Uncertainty
IMPACT ON TRADING
THE INEVITABLE PRICE SHOCKS
WHY SO MUCH ABOUT PRICE SHOCKS?
COMPLEXITY AND CONTAGION RISK
THE UGLY SIDE
TAKING DEFENSIVE ACTION
ACCEPTING PERFORMANCE FOR WHAT IT IS
Chapter 2: The Importance of Price Noise
NOISE EXPLAINED
DIFFERENT MARKETS
A CLOSER LOOK AT EQUITY INDEX MARKETS
IMPORTANCE OF NOISE
DETERMINING THE STRATEGY
CAPITALIZING ON THE TREND OF NOISE
Chapter 3: Pairs Trading: Understanding the
Process
THE PROCESS
THE BASICS
TARGET VOLATILITY
HOME BUILDERS
USING ETFS
PORTFOLIO OF HOME BUILDER PAIRS
EXECUTION AND THE PART-TIME TRADER
STOP-LOSSES
TRADING INTRADAY
KEY POINTS TO REMEMBER
Chapter 4: Pairs Trading Using Futures
FUTURES
MECHANICS OF A PAIRS TRADE IN FUTURES
INFLATION SCARES
TRADING ENERGY PAIRS
REVISITING MOMENTUM WITH ENERGY
MARKETS
A MINIPORTFOLIO OF NATURAL GAS PAIRS
THE INFLATION PAIRS: CRUDE, THE EURUSD,
AND GOLD
EQUITY INDEX PAIRS
LEVERAGING WITH FUTURES
LONDON METALS EXCHANGE PAIRS
VOLATILITY FILTERS
INTEREST RATE FUTURES
SUMMARY
Chapter 5: Risk-Adjusted Spreads
DELL AND HEWLETT-PACKARD
TRADING BOTH LONG-TERM (HEDGED)
TRENDS AND SHORT-TERM MEAN REVERSION
GOLD, PLATINUM, AND SILVER
THE PLATINUM/GOLD RATIO
IMPLIED YIELD
THE YIELD CURVE
TREND TRADING OF LONDON METAL
EXCHANGE PAIRS
SUMMARY
Chapter 6: Cross-Market Trading and the Stress
Indicator
THE CROSSOVER TRADE
THE STRESS INDICATOR
GOLD, COPPER, AND PLATINUM
MINING COMPANIES
AGRIBUSINESS PAIRS
THE MAJOR ENERGY PRODUCERS
PORTFOLIO OF CROSS-MARKET ENERGY
PAIRS
OTHER OPPORTUNITIES
SOME FINAL NOTES
Chapter 7: Revisiting Pairs Using the Stress
Indicator
FUTURES MARKETS AND THE STRESS
INDICATOR
EQUITY INDEX FUTURES
INTEREST RATE FUTURES
THE PORTFOLIO SPREADSHEET
SUMMARY OF PAIRS TRADING
Chapter 8: Traditional Market-Neutral Trading
HOME BUILDERS
TREND OR MEAN REVERSION?
BASIC MARKET-NEUTRAL CONCEPT
VOLATILITY-ADJUSTING THE POSITION SIZE
ARBING THE DOW: A LARGE-SCALE
PROGRAM
THOUGHTS ABOUT MARKET-NEUTRAL TREND
FOLLOWING
MARKET NEUTRAL USING FUTURES
MARKET-NEUTRAL COMMENTS
Chapter 9: Other Stat-Arb Methods
TRADE-OFFS
SYSTEM BRIEFS
NEW HIGHS AND NEW LOWS
MERGER ARB
CREATING YOUR OWN INDEX ARBITRAGE
ARBING THE DOW
ARBING THE S&P 500— INDEX ARBITRAGE
About the Companion Web Site
About the Author
Index
Founded in 1807, John Wiley & Sons is the oldest independent publishing
company in the United States. With offices in North America, Europe,
Australia and Asia, Wiley is globally committed to developing and
marketing print and electronic products and services for our customers'
professional and personal knowledge and understanding.
The Wiley Trading series features books by traders who have survived
the market's ever changing temperament and have prospered—some by
reinventing systems, others by getting back to basics. Whether a novice
trader, professional or somewhere in-between, these books will provide
the advice and strategies needed to prosper today and well into the future.
For a list of available titles, visit our Web site at www.WileyFinance.com.

Copyright © 2011 by Perry Kaufman. All rights reserved.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey.
Published simultaneously in Canada.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval
system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic,
mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning, or otherwise, except as
permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright
Act, without either the prior written permission of the Publisher, or
authorization through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to the
Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA
01923, (978) 750-8400, fax (978) 646-8600, or on the Web at
www.copyright.com. Requests to the Publisher for permission should be
addressed to the Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111
River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, (201) 748-6011, fax (201) 748-6008, or
online at http://www.wiley.com/go/permissions.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author
have used their best efforts in preparing this book, they make no
representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy or
completeness of the contents of this book and specifically disclaim any
implied warranties of merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose. No
warranty may be created or extended by sales representatives or written
sales materials. The advice and strategies contained herein may not be
suitable for your situation. You should consult with a professional where
appropriate. Neither the publisher nor author shall be liable for any loss of
profit or any other commercial damages, including but not limited to
special, incidental, consequential, or other damages.
For general information on our other products and services or for
technical support, please contact our Customer Care Department within
the United States at (800) 762-2974, outside the United States at (317)
572-3993 or fax (317) 572-4002.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some
content that appears in print may not be available in electronic books. For
more information about Wiley products, visit our web site at
www.wiley.com.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data:
Kaufman, Perry J.
Alpha trading : profitable strategies that remove directional risk / Perry
Kaufman.
p. cm. – (Wiley trading series)
Includes index.
ISBN 978-0-470-52974-4 (cloth); ISBN 978-1-118-00120-2 (ebk);
ISBN 978-1-118-00121-9 (ebk); ISBN 978-1-118-00122-6 (ebk)
1. Pairs trading. 2. Futures. I. Title.
HG4661.K33 2011
332.64′52–dc22
2010032753
Preface
I wanted to write this book after the collapse of the tech bubble in 2000,
but it wasn’t until the subprime disaster of 2008 that I decided to do it.
Investors should not be subject to the tremendous losses that the market
serves up. And traders do not need to make a commitment to a long or
short position all the time. There are other choices, and those choices do
not necessitate compromising returns. They do require somewhat more
complicated positions, but the reward is that, if the S&P collapses
because of a terrorist attack, or program trading by one of the big
investments houses runs amok and causes a 10 percent drop in the S&P,
you are safe.
We’ve learned greater respect for risk in the past few years. It’s a lesson
that we all should have learned much sooner, but any time is a good time
to improve your skills. Part of that advancement is to be aware of
unconscious risks. When we trade more than one stock, each trade should
have equal risk. That gives each trade an equal opportunity to contribute to
the final results. If you don’t do that, you are consciously or unconsciously
saying that you think the trade with the largest risk is most likely to give you
the best return. If that’s the case, you should only make one trade in the
best item and forget about diversification.
This book is as much about the process as it is about the results. Its
target audience is active traders but not necessarily intraday traders. The
intended reader is someone who spends time deciding which stocks or
futures markets to buy or sell and doesn’t hold a trade indefinitely when it
goes the wrong way. Each step is explained, and there are examples of
how the numbers should look. There is also a website that has the basic
spreadsheets needed to do all the calculations.
The strategies in this book are well known to be profitable. They are
called statistical arbitrage, or stat-arb, and they can be traded by holding
positions for a few days, as suggested here, or for milliseconds, as
implemented by the big investment houses. To trade, all you need is a
spreadsheet to do a few calculations; then enter prices at the end of the
day or anytime during the day when you think there is an opportunity.
Trades have a high probability of success.
You cannot just believe that something works; you need to prove it to
yourself. The black box approach is unacceptable and has proved a
disaster to many investors. It’s your money, and you owe it to yourself to
understand and verify everything—even what is shown in this book.
It is one thing to be given a strategy and another to use it successfully.
Once you have verified and paper-traded the strategies, you have a better
chance of being successful because you have become part of the
development process.
The development process is an exciting exploration. It begins with a
sound premise and moves down various paths that may or may not turn out
to be useful. But at the same time, it teaches valuable lessons. You
understand why one idea works and another doesn’t. You understand the
robust and the fragile parts of the strategies. At some time in the future,
you may be called upon to change the strategy because the market has
changed—volatility has dropped to a level that limits opportunity or risen to
a point of unacceptable risk. Markets that used to move together no longer
do so, or as in the fourth quarter of 2008, markets moved together for no
apparent reason.
Without having gone through the process, you do not have the
knowledge to make these changes or the confidence that they will work.
This book will present important strategies that should be part of any
trader’s portfolio. It will develop and explain the features that are
incorporated, as well as choices that were not taken. But it is the sound
premise of these ideas that is the underlying reason for its success. At the
end, I hope you have learned a lot and that you trade successfully.
Perry Kaufman
January 2011
Chapter 1
Uncertainty
The investment world had a rude reminder in August and September of
2008 that forecasts and risk have more uncertainty than it would like to
believe. From August 28 to the following March 9, the Standard & Poor's
(S&P) 500 dropped 47%. Even more remarkable was that every
investment was dragged down with it—hedge funds that were expected to
offer diversification, commodity funds where you have the security of socalled
hard currency, real estate, art, and of course, every possible stock in
nearly every country.
Oddly, the U.S. dollar strengthened against the euro by about 15%
during that time. It was odd because it was the United States that
originated what we now call the subprime disaster. Yet in a crisis,
investors still move money to the United States for safety.
What did we learn from this? Mainly, we learned that there is more
uncertainty than we thought in the world of investments. Maybe that's not
entirely correct. We just tend to ignore the risks when everything goes well
for a long time. During the late 1990s, a similar move occurred in the tech
stocks, with NASDAQ dropping from 5000 to below 1200. For those a bit
older, or students of history, there was the crash of 1987 resulting in a drop
of 39.8% in the S&P from October 6 to October 22. But the stock market
had recovered by the end of the year, so investors who didn't react to the
drop never suffered a sustained loss. By contrast, the recent drop in the
S&P lasted from August 11, 2008, to March 3, 2009, far longer than 1987
but not comparable to the Black Monday of 1929.
At the time of this writing, the stock market is down only 15% from its
highs. Again, investors who had closed their eyes are still suffering a loss
in their pensions, but nothing devastating. Those who liquidated their
portfolios and moved them to money market funds locked in their losses.
The right decision is only known afterward.
IMPACT ON TRADING
But this book is about trading, not investing, and 2008 was a banner year
for futures traders at the same time the equity markets were collapsing.
The same could have been true for someone trading exchange-traded
funds (ETFs) or any investment in which going short is a natural part of
trading. The main beneficiaries were trend followers, who were able to get
short (equity index markets), or long (interest rates), and stay with the trend
for months, capturing what is known as the fat tail.
We can then say that many traders lost money and some profited, but
the most important lesson is that the risk was enormous. Volatility rose
from under 20% to 80%, a previously unthinkable level (see Figure 1.1). If
you can't manage risk, then your interim losses may be too big to ever see
the profits.
FIGURE 1.1 The volatility index (VIX) for S&P 500 from August 2008
through mid-May 2010. © Yahoo!
Money Moves the Markets
Normally, risk is reduced through diversification, but that wasn't true during
this last crisis because the movement of money reversed the direction of
all markets at the same time. In a crisis, most investors simply want to get
their money out. If they are long equities, then equities fall; if they are long
the Goldman Sachs Commodity Index (GSCI), then that falls; and if they
are short the Japanese yen in the carry trade, the yen rises. Cash, or
guaranteed government debt, is the only safe place, provided it's not
Greece, Italy, Spain, Portugal, or a variety of emerging markets that may
have even greater risk.
THE INEVITABLE PRICE SHOCKS
We all know that price shocks are extreme price moves that cannot be
predicted. We also understand that they are worse when the investing
public is holding the wrong position, that is, when we expect the Fed to
lower interest rates to stimulate the economy, but instead they raise rates
to prevent inflation. Of course, that's not supposed to happen in our new
era of transparency. But what about a military coup in an oil-rich country
that cuts off the needed flow of supply to the West? Or an assassination?
Or a surprise election result? All of these have happened.
We might think of all price movement as a series of price shocks of
different sizes---all reactions to today's news. Most often, these shocks are
very small, but some are bigger, and occasionally one is gigantic. Do you
ever wonder how these price shocks net against your market positions? Is
it different if you are a long-term rather than a short-term trader? Is there
something you can do to take advantage of a price shock, or at least not
be hurt by it?
Biased against You
First of all, understand that you can't change the odds to have better than a
50% chance that you will profit from a price shock. Realistically, you would
be lucky to have 50% of the price shocks in your favor. However, it does
seem clear that when more people hold the same positions, any surprise
that is contrary to that direction will have a greater impact while surprising
news in a favorable direction will have little effect. But that information is
not enough to make money because we still don't know when the next price
shock will come.
Very few traders, professional or amateur, recognize the importance of
price shocks and the effect that they have on profits. Given how illprepared
and undercapitalized many traders are, one large price shock is
all they need to be forced out permanently.
Price Shocks and Your Position
Do price shocks hurt the short-term or the long-term trader more? To find
out, we ran a moving average test of a few different markets and totaled
the value of the price shocks that caused profits or losses. Specifically,
The moving average calculation periods ranged from 10 days to
200 days, in steps of 10 days.
A price shock was defined as any day in which the ratio of
today's price change to the standard deviation of the previous
10 day price changes was greater than 2.5. That means, if the
standard deviation of the S&P daily price changes was 6 big
points, then a gain or loss of 15 points would trigger a price
shock. Specifically, if the threshold for a price shock t = 2.5 and
n = 10, then if
we can say that day t is a price shock.
By using the standard deviation of the daily changes, we can test using
either the cash index or back-adjusted futures. Back-adjusting does not
change the price differences or the standard deviation, although it will
change any percentage calculation because the divisor is scaled to an
artificial price. When working with futures, it's best to use price differences,
and with stocks or stock indices, we should use returns.
S&P Price Shocks
The impact of price shocks on the S&P is unique. We believe that there is
an upward bias in the index markets, caused by favorable tax treatment of
capital gains as well as legal restrictions in some pension plans, which
results in investors holding long positions. Short sales are limited to a far
smaller group of professional traders, perhaps a few more now that
inverse ETFs and bear funds (inverse mutual funds, such as ProFunds)
allow easy access. Investors also seem to gravitate toward a clear bull
market in any investment, whether the stock market or gold or oil. It should
not be a surprise that downside shocks would hurt most investors. Our
moving average system, however, is unbiased because it goes long or
short according to the direction of the trend and not because of tax
consequences.
Figure 1.2 shows the daily price changes of the S&P futures as a ratio of
the standard deviation of the previous 10 days, as given in the previous
formula. The data cover 13 years, ending in May 2010. Even though prices
were well off the lows of the subprime crisis by February 2009, it is easy to
see that there is still a bias toward downward price shocks. By looking at
the ±4 lines on the left axis, we see that only seven events came close to
that level, and not many moved above the 2 level, while there were many
more both crossing –2 and penetrating –4. We might have expected that
more computerized trading, and perhaps more investment sophistication,
would cause shocks to be more symmetrical in recent years, but that
doesn't seem to be the case.
FIGURE 1.2 S&P 1-day volatility as a ratio to the standard deviation of the
previous 10 days.
FIGURE 1.3 Comparison of the net returns for S&P moving average
systems through May 2010 and the contribution from “more” and “fewer” 1-
day price shocks.
Using this chart, we choose two price-shock thresholds, 3.0 and 4.0, to
compare the impact of what we will call more shocks and fewer shocks.
The fewer case is also larger shocks. We run a test of moving averages
using calculation periods from 10 days to 200 days over the past 10 years.
The rules are that a long position is entered when the moving average
turns up, and a short is entered when the moving average turns down. The
system is always in the market. A $25 round-turn commission is charged
to cover all costs. Results are shown as Net PL in Figure 1.3, along with
the net results of the 1-day price shocks. The performance pattern of the
S&P begins with large losses for faster trends and finally shows profits for
trend periods approaching 200 days.
The lines representing the contributions from 1-day price shocks show
that in nearly all cases, the net impact of price shocks are negative returns.
This can be attributed to most investors holding the same long position
when there is a sustained bull market. We would caution traders not to
believe that price shocks will contribute to short-term profits, even though
the chart shows some net gains for the 10-day average and again for the
longest calculation periods. At best, you can assume a 50% chance of a
price shock in your favor. Anything else is strictly luck.
We thought it would be interesting to compare the results of these tests
without the impact of the subprime crisis; therefore, we retested the data
beginning at the same point, 1997, when the e-mini S&P began trading,
and ending on January 1, 2008. The results are shown in Figure 1.4. The
results are actually very similar for the contribution of price shocks because
only a few shocks would have been added. In addition, the measurement
of a price shock is relative to the previous 10 days, so that the sustained
high volatility during the months from August 2008 through February 2009
made it difficult to have any shock that would have been 3 times larger.
Instead, we see that the S&P was a poor performer, using a simple
moving average system, and that the large downward move and the
following rally from August 2008 through the current mid-2010 boosted the
profits from $25,000 for the longest trends to nearly $60,000. Simple
systematic trend following can perform well when traders can’t.
FIGURE 1.4 S&P price shocks for the period beginning January 1991 and
ending on the last day of 2007, to avoid the effects of the subprime crisis.
Interest Rates
Interest rates are a far less volatile and more orderly market than any
equity index. Using the Eurobund as the representative, we run the same
tests as we did for the S&P, using €25 as the round-turn cost for each
trade, and beginning in 1991. The results are shown in Figure 1.5. They
differ considerably from the S&P results because more shocks total very
negative returns, averaging about half of the net profits. The fewer, larger
price shocks netted an impact closer to zero, but the more frequent
shocks, the results of periodic economic reports, move consistently
against the trend position.
FIGURE 1.5 Impact of price shocks on Euro bund moving average returns.
FIGURE 1.6 Eurobund futures prices, nearest contract, back-adjusted
from 1990.
The large losses due to price shocks can be attributed to the Eurobund
trend over the test period, as seen in Figure 1.6. With prices moving higher
over the past 18 years, we would expect most investors to be holding long
positions. Then price shocks to the downside would most often generate
losses. As the trend calculation period increases, the time holding a long
position increases; therefore, price shocks to the upside become a larger
profit component, and shocks to the downside a larger losing component.
These can be seen in Figure 1.7, where the losses due to short-side
shocks far outweigh the gains from upside shocks.
FIGURE 1.7 Net effect of price shocks on Eurobund long and short
positions.
Crude Oil
Another market that has attracted a great deal of attention is crude oil,
rallying from $40 per barrel to nearly $150 before falling back to $30 in just
over three months, shown in Figure 1.8. A breakdown of the price shocks
(Figure 1.9) shows that more shocks added to profits, while the largest
shocks moved against the positions being held. This was a remarkable
period for oil, and any news (more shocks) was taken as bullish. While
there were big downside surprises, the market ignored them.
FIGURE 1.8 Crude oil, back-adjusted futures from 2003.
FIGURE 1.9 Crude oil effect of price shocks on the profits of a moving
average strategy.
The profits from varying the calculation period of the moving average
show that the slowest trends held the long position too far into the reversal
that followed the peak of $150, giving back most of the gains. In hindsight,
the perfect trend was about 110 days, but it's not likely we would have
been trading it. Most macrotrend programs would have chosen something
in the range of 60 to 80 days, all of which performed well and had small or
some positive effect from price shocks.
WHY SO MUCH ABOUT PRICE
SHOCKS?
Price shocks represent the worst-case scenario for traders. They are
unexpected, violent, and most often generate losses. Even more important
is that most traders don't plan for a price shock. You can plan to survive a
price shock by holding large reserves so that a 4-standard deviation event
will not produce a loss that you can't handle. But to do that, you need to
give up leverage. More often than not, without the leverage, the result will
be returns that are not justified by the risk.
Algorithmic traders are also guilty of ignoring price shocks. They test
their programs on historic data that contain past shocks, and when they
design their strategies and risk controls, the accumulated result of the way
they traded during those past shocks can often produce net gains—a
situation not likely to happen in real trading. The biggest offender was
Long Term Capital Management, which, we are told, removed the price
shocks from the data history because they believed them to be unrealistic
(in the context of their trading) and not likely to be repeated. While it's true
that the next shock is never a repeat of another past event, there are
countless new market surprises.
What can you do to avoid price shocks, even if you can't predict them?
The practical solutions are:
Don't trade.
Stay out of the market as much as possible.
Choose a faster system so that you're not holding the same
position as everyone else.
Trade a hedged or market-neutral position.
Of course, no one reading this book would choose not to trade, so we'll
ignore that point. On the other hand, staying out of the market as much as
possible is very practical. That can be done easily with faster trading
systems, where you target profits and have specific timing requirements to
entering a new trade. If you end up holding positions for one-third of the
number of trading days, then you have a 66% chance of missing a price
shock.
Trading a faster system is also better. By not holding the same position
as everyone else, and getting net long or short frequently, you have a good
chance of a positive price shock 50% of the time.
Our choice is the last point, trading a spread or market-neutral position,
which takes price shocks out of the picture completely. Of course, there is
a chance that the two markets that are spread will not react as expected,
but that is a very small chance. In addition, mean reverting strategies,
which represent most of the market-neutral programs, are fast trading and
require two or more markets to diverge; therefore, they are in the market
for a relatively short period of time. As we will discuss later, long holding
periods are not compatible with a mean reverting method because you
then fight with the trend.
COMPLEXITY AND CONTAGION RISK
This generation of traders has recently experienced a series of contagion
risks, where one seemingly modest financial event causes another
seemingly controlled financial event, and in the end, we have a very large
event. The first of these was the subprime meltdown. It first appeared to be
limited to the U.S. housing market, then started to affect lending liquidity,
and then moved to bank reserve requirements, until it had spread
throughout the United States, Europe, and finally Asia. Equity markets all
plunged, and investors ran to the safety of government treasuries.
We are now teetering on the problem of sovereign debt, first with
Greece and probably some other countries in the European Union, but
possibly spreading back to the United States. It's not yet a reality, but that's
not because the financial news networks aren't trying to scare everyone
into believing that it will happen.
The problem stems from a structural change in the way markets are
used. Investors now diversify into a wide range of programs, placing
money in hedge funds, bond funds, and real estate trusts. If one link in the
chain fails, then investors must liquidate other holdings to cover losses.
That leads to further liquidation. It is the complexity of the markets that we
don't understand, the way money interacts with it all, causing the possibility
of sequential failures.
THE UGLY SIDE
No discussion of uncertainty would be complete without recognizing that a
different type of price shock occurs when we find out that we've been
fooled. Of these, the greatest of all scams was Bernie Madoff, who fooled
everyone into thinking that he had a lock on trading profits. Of course, he
refused to discuss the specifics of his trading method because it was
proprietary.
That brings up the issue of black boxes. A black box is usually a fully
systematic, algorithmic trading model that is used for trading but not
disclosed to anyone outside the company. Naturally, we can understand
why a money manager would need to keep the specifics of a strategy
secret. But then we don't really know what they're using or if they are using
anything systematic at all. Fortunately, most investment managers, hedge
fund operators, and commodity trading advisors (CTAs) are very credible.
They give investors a general idea of what methods they use for trading
and how they control risk. These can most often be verified by watching
their performance under various market conditions. Unlike Madoff's results,
which were up 15% each year regardless of market conditions, we expect
to see periods of loss but more gains than losses over time.
Even in the best times, investing in someone else's trading program
involves added risk---what we would normally call counterparty risk, the
risk of one of the parties failing to perform their fiduciary responsibility. If
you are the investor, that could be the stock or commodity exchange, but
more likley the person or company managing your money.
If it is at all possible, you need to manage your own investment portfolio.
Your common sense is enough to keep it on a safe track. If you're a trader,
then all the better, because you can decide what strategy and how much
leverage to use. And there is no penalty for stopping and withdrawing your
money, and no waiting period. During the subprime crisis, many hedge
funds refused to allow investors to withdraw their funds “for their own good”
and because there was no market to liquidate their positions.
TAKING DEFENSIVE ACTION
We propose that the solution to all this risk and uncertainty is to trade in a
way that removes exposure to directional risk. That include all forms of
statistical arbitrage (stat-arb), from spreads to yield-curve trading to
program trading, and from the simplest pairs trade to large-scale marketneutral
strategies. These methods extract alpha from the market, profits
over and above what might be gained, or lost, by a passive investment in
the stock or bond market. Alpha is considered a measure of cleverness,
although you will see that some of the methods do not require much more
than common sense.
Not High-Frequency Trading
There has been a lot in the news about high-frequency trading, by which
the major investment houses, such as Goldman Sachs and Morgan
Stanley, trade hundreds or thousands of times each day to extract tiny but
consistent profits. Much of this is conceptually simple but done on a
massive scale only achievable by computerized trading. In fact, one of the
main sources of success is pairs trading, which capitalizes on distortions
between two related markets. Besides computerization, the edge in this
method is that the cost of trading is near zero for these investment houses.
We can't possibly compete with that, but we can compete in a different
time frame.
In this book, we spend considerable time on pairs trading, but instead of
holding a trade for microseconds, we will be looking at larger moves of
one to three days. We will begin with the stock market but then look at
futures markets and combinations of stocks and futures. Futures markets
are more limited in selection but easy to trade, and they offer exceptional
leverage.
The price movements of stock and futures markets are related for many
reasons. Some of them are driven by common, long-term economic
factors, and some are based on current geopolitical events. We often find
ourselves commenting on how the S&P is moving with bond prices, or gold
is moving with the EURUSD exchange rate, or that gold and crude oil are
closely tracking one another. During extreme stress, markets move
together, and we can take advantage of those opportunities, even if they
last only three months or a year.
The methods discussed in this book are based on sound theory but are
what we call data driven. Fundamentals play a role only in defining the
strategy, such as relative-value trading, which is actually all relative and no
value. But without a sound premise, we cannot expect to be profitable. On
the other hand, we need to act often and precisely, which can be done only
with a computerized trading program continually evaluating price changes.
While it is possible to trade a few pairs using a simple spreadsheet, the
true advantages come from a large-scale application which reduces risk
due to diversification.
All of these methods fall into the category of statistical arbitrage, or statarb.
Because they are computerized, they are also in the larger group of
algorithmic trading models. Most important, these models are not
exposed to price direction, so a shock to the market that moves all stocks
in one direction will not itself cause an arbitrary profit or loss. Only the
relative strength or weakness of one market compared with another will do
that. Given the surprises of the past few years, that seems to be a much
safer approach to trading.
ACCEPTING PERFORMANCE FOR
WHAT IT IS
One final but important point: We cannot eliminate risk, no matter how
clever we are or what powerful tools we use. Even when we express risk in
terms of annualized volatility, we don't really believe that we will see that
risk. A 12% target volatility means there is a 2.5% chance of losing 24% in
one year. But if you lost 10% or 15%, then you would be looking to change
trading systems or somehow alter your risk exposure, yet your returns are
still within the range that you defined.
The only way to remove future risk is by reducing leverage. Unfortunately,
lower leverage means lower returns. If you find a past situation that caused
exceptionally large risk, and create rules to eliminate it from future trading,
you'll be following in the steps of Long-Term Capital Management. These
risks never repeat in the same way and may even get bigger.
Throughout this book, we will discuss ways to manage individual trading
risk as well as portfolio risk. None of these approaches tries to eliminate
risk. The methods are simple and should appeal to common sense. They
are also very important for long-term success.
Chapter 2
The Importance of Price Noise
Market noise is an important but elusive component of price movement. It
is the up-and-down, erratic price movement that goes nowhere and often
causes you to be stopped out of a trade only to see prices reverse back in
your direction. Traders have no trouble recognizing noise. Most price
shocks are an extreme case of noise, when the large move is followed by
an equally sharp reversal the next day. A price shock is not noise if prices
continue in the direction of the shock. That is most likely a structural
change. The elusive part is:
How do you tell the difference between a structural change and
a price shock?
When does a price move indicate a trend change, and when is it
just noise?
How do you take advantage of price noise?
Th ese questions don't have simple answers, but what we learn from
exploring them is still very valuable and will explain some of the important
choices that are made in the following chapters.
NOISE EXPLAINED
The way we think about price noise is a day with very high volatility but a
close nearly unchanged, or a day when prices closed sharply lower, then
reversed nearly the entire move the next day. We also associate noise with
the way prices react to our trading method. We get stopped out of a long
position when prices break a key level, but that turns out to be the low of
the move, and we're out at the worst price of the day.
In general, noise is a disorderly move. It doesn't need to be volatile, just
erratic and unpredictable. Econometricians say that when you remove the
trend, the seasonal pattern, and the cycle, the three main components of
price movement, what you have left is noise. That's interesting but not very
useful. We don't want to remove those three elements because the
combination of everything causes price moves that can generate profits.
Instead, we'll think of noise in the same way we approach the walk of a
drunken sailor (no offense to sailors—it could be anyone).
If a sailor were to walk from point A to point B in a straight line, we can
say that his route has no noise. If he meanders slightly off that straight path,
we can see that as a small amount of noise; however, if he staggers first to
the right, then sharply to the left, then backward and forward by different
amounts, but ultimately heading slightly toward his goal, we would say
there was a large amount of noise.
FIGURE 2.1 Noise is calculated as the net move (from A to B) divided by
the sum of the individual moves (1 through 7). All values are taken as
positive numbers.
Once you understand the picture, seen in Figure 2.1, the concept should
become clear: the straighter the path, the less noise; the more erratic the
path, the more noise. This pattern can be expressed as a value we call the
efficiency ratio. First, we measure the net distance gained from point A to
point B, always taken as a positive number. Then we measure the actual
path taken by the sailor in his journey from point A to point B. Those values
are also always positive, regardless of whether he is stumbling forward or
staggering backward. The efficiency of his walk is given by the ratio
Referring now to the efficiency ratio (ER), if the sailor walked in a
straight line, the ratio would be 1 because the numerator and denominator
would be the same. As the sailor wobbles more, the denominator gets
larger. If he wandered back and forth for a really, really long time, the
denominator would get very big, and the ratio would move toward zero.
Therefore, a walk with no noise will have the ratio of 1.0, and a completely
directionless walk would be zero. This can be shown mathematically as
where t represents today, P is the price, and n is the total number of
days used in the calculation. As with many financial calculations, this is
done over a fixed, relatively short period. By calculating the ratio each day
based on rolling time periods, we get a history of the price noise. When we
average those individual ratios over a long period of time, we get a profile
of the amount of noise in a specific stock, index, or commodities market.
Note that the value ERt can be zero (or near zero) if the denominator is
extremely large or if the numerator is zero, which can happen if the starting
and ending prices are the same. The ratio has no sign, so that we don't
know if the prices have gone up or down over the calculation period.
Because the calculation is greatly dependent on the starting and ending
values, some mathematicians consider it unstable. However, averaging
the values over some period of price history minimizes that problem.
Volatility Neutral
The ratio also removes the volatility from the calculation. For example, if
prices moved up an equal amount, say $0.50, every day for 10 days, then
the total gain would be $5.00 and the ratio would be 1.0. On the other
hand, if it moved up $0.10 each day, the gain would be $1.00, and the ratio
would still be 1.0.
That is an important concept because it means that the efficiency ratio
may not be sufficient for trading. An arbitrage or relative value strategy that
profits from trading against the current move usually needs sufficient
volatility to clear a profit. This ratio doesn't have that information, although a
separate calculation could easily solve that problem.
Fractal Efficiency
The efficiency ratio was developed and used by this author in the late
1970s. It wasn't until Benoit Mandelbrot wrote The Fractal Geometry of
Nature (W. H. Freeman, 1982) that the concept of fractals became clear.1
Up to then, fractals were not thought of as having common properties, but
Mandelbrot used them to measure the roughness of the coastline,
distinguishing this from classic, orderly, Euclidian geometry. Realists, such
as Mandelbrot, believe that straight lines exist only in theory.
It's not clear where the formula or naming of fractal efficiency first
appeared, but it's a good description of the efficiency ratio. The concept of
a fractal applies to all dimensions, and it appears that the ratio is equally
descriptive when used for daily, weekly, and monthly price data as well as
5-minute and hourly data. Noise is noise.
In this book, we'll use the term efficiency ratio because it best describes
the way prices move from one point to another.
Calculation Example
Using Excel, the efficiency ratio is calculated in a few easy steps, shown in
Table 2.1 . Beginning with the S&P cash index, SPX, in August 1998, the
date and closing prices are placed into columns B and C. The calculation
period will be 10 days, appearing in cell D1. This technique will be used
with the Excel feature offset, which will allow us to change the calculation
period, and the results will automatically be recalculated.
In column D, beginning in row 12, calculate the absolute value of
the 10-day price difference. The Excel formula is abs(C13-
OFFSET(C13,-$D$2,0)). This value will be the numerator of the ratio.
TABLE 2.1 Example of calculating the efficiency ratio using
SPX.
In column E, beginning in row 3, calculate the 1-day absolute
differences, abs(C4-C3).
Column F, beginning in row 13, will be the 10-day sum of the
values in column E, sum(E13:OFFSET(E13,-$D$2+1,0)). This will be the
denominator.
Column G is the efficiency ratio, D13/F13.
DIFFERENT MARKETS
Before trying to figure out how to use the ratio, we can discover interesting
information from calculating the ratio over a wide range of markets. An 8-
day calculation period was chosen because it will show the greatest
differences between the data. The efficiency ratio over only 8 days should
bounce around quite a bit, offering the opportunity for each market to show
its patterns. If the efficient ratio is robust, then using a longer calculation
period should simply scale the results. Remember that a ratio value of 1.0
can happen only if prices move in the same direction for every day of the
calculation period, so using a value of 40, or even 20, is unnecessarily
large and simply compresses the ratio values.
Figure 2.2 shows 44 of the most liquid futures markets, including equity
index, fixed income, currency, energy, metals, and agricultural
commodities. The ratios span a range of only about 0.11 ratio points, but
for a test of nearly five years, the differences are significant. For
convenience, the actual ratios are shown from lowest to highest, in four
columns, in Table 2.2.
FIGURE 2.2 Average noise level from 2005 through 2009 for selected
markets.
TABLE 2.2 Efficiency ratios for 44 markets.
Both Figure 2.2 and Table 2.2 paint an interesting picture. The lowest 10
ratios, in the first set of columns in Table 2.2 , are all equity index markets.
The only missing indices are the Deutscher Aktienindex (DAX), which
appears at the top of the last set, and the Korea Composite Stock Price
Index (Kospi), in the middle of the third set. That means the index markets,
as a whole, are the noisiest of all markets traded. Is that a surprise? Even
during the remarkable period from mid-2008 through the first quarter of
2009, when index markets seemed to go straight down, the ratio says that
it was noisy—or at least relatively noisier than other markets.
Of the nine equity index markets leading the pack, the Russell and the
Standard & Poor's (S&P) are the noisiest. Other studies have shown that
volume and noise are related. That is not to say that they are at all the
same, but the observation is that newly trading markets and emerging
markets with lower volume and often dominated by a few large companies
tend to have lower noise. Trading in new markets with low volume tends to
be dominated by commercials. These are businesses and institutions
using the markets to hedge or those with an arrangement with the
exchange to provide liquidity. Commercial positions tend to be single large
orders, and many commercials have the same view of the market. The
result is that prices move in the same direction more often than is normal,
the result of fewer and larger trades. We'll discuss why this is important a
little later. Meanwhile, note that the closest we come to an emerging
market is the Kospi, which is in the middle of the sorted sequence of
ratios. The DAX is not emerging but has much lower volume and much
higher volatility than the other index markets, which provides a reason for it
to have a high ratio.
On the other side of the scale, the market with the highest ratio and the
least noise is the Eurodollar interest rate, and it's much higher than all the
other markets. We could say, in general, that interest rates are the group
with the lowest noise, with five of them in the last set of columns and almost
all of them in the second half. Had we included other 3-month rates, such
as the short sterling, Euribor, Euroswiss, or Euroyen, they would have all
fallen at the end. The other groups of markets—currencies, metals,
agriculturals, and energy—are mostly scattered in the middle two columns.
Of the foreign exchange (FX) markets, the EURUSD has the most trend,
and the AUDUSD the most noise.
A CLOSER LOOK AT EQUITY INDEX
MARKETS
Because the concept of noise is important, we will look at a larger set of
equity index markets, using a 40-day calculation period. We noted in the
previous section that increasing the calculation period would scale down
the ratio values but do little to change the order of ranking. Figure 2.3
shows the results of calculating the efficiency ratio for 24 world equity index
markets. The ratio on the left ranges from 0.14 to 0.24 instead of 0.30 to
0.41. The markets with the highest noise are on the right, beginning with
London's FTSE and the Paris CAC, then the U.S. markets: the S&P 100
(OEX), Dow Transports, S&P, Dow Industrials, Russell, and NASDAQ.
These are a combination of actively traded markets, as in the case of the
U.S., or moderately traded markets not dominated by commercial use. On
the far left are the emerging markets: India's Sensex, China, Brazil's
Bovespa, and Russia's Micex indices. These markets tend to make large,
sustained moves in one direction.
FIGURE 2.3 The efficiency ratio calculated for 24 world equity index
markets, using a 40-day period.
IMPORTANCE OF NOISE
The two pieces of information we should come away with from the noise
study are that index markets are very noisy and that interest rates have a
low level of noise. What can we do with that?
When we look at various trading strategies that hold outright long and
short positions, the primary choices are trend following, taking a position
in the direction of the current price move, and mean reversion, trading
against the current move in expectation of prices correcting back the mean
(average price). If prices move very smoothly, going from one price level to
another with only small retracements, then a trend approach should work
well. On the other hand, if prices keep changing direction and rarely
sustain a continuous move in one direction, then mean reversion should be
sustain a continuous move in one direction, then mean reversion should be
the preferred approach. This is exactly what the level of noise tells us.
According to the ratios in Table 2.2, we should be using a trend strategy
to trade the Eurodollars and all other interest rates but a mean reverting
method to trade the equity index markets, with the exception of the DAX.
We don't know exactly what threshold value of noise tells us to change from
mean reversion to trending.
This premise can be easily proved by calculating the profitability of a
typical trend strategy for equity index and interest rate markets. At the
same time, we can find the noise level that distinguishes a trend candidate
from a mean reversion one. We'll use a 10-day calculation period, which is
close to the 8-day period used for the noise calculation. The rules for
entering and exiting are:
Buy (close out shorts and enter a long) when the 10-day moving
average turns up.
Sell (close out longs and enter a short) when the 10-day moving
average turns down.
No commissions or slippage was used, so the lower volatility or
frequency of trades did not influence the results. For this test, we are
interested only in the pure trend results compared with the corresponding
noise. For technical traders, we point out that using the direction of the
moving average, rather than a price penetration, for determining the
change of trend works best for longer-term trends. It reduces the number of
false penetrations and greatly reduces the costs. For very short-term
trends, when you want the first sign of a change, using the price
penetration is more responsive even though there are more false signals.
The markets used were heavily weighted with equity indices, but there
was a broad sample of others.
Index markets: Russell, S&P, Dow Jones Industrial Average
(DJIA), DAX, Kospi, and Tokyo Stock Price Index (Topix).
Interest rates: U.S. 30-year bonds, Eurobund, Eurodollars.
Currencies: Euro, Japanese yen, Swiss franc.
Energy: Crude oil.
Metals: Gold.
Agricultural: Wheat, soybeans.
Th e test was run using TradeStation, and the same test interval, 2005 to
May 2009, was used for all markets. The results available were the net
profit or loss and the profit factor, the gross profits divided by the gross
losses. When the profit factor is above 1.0, the market is net profitable.
The profit factor is not as useful as the Sharpe ratio or information ratio
(the more commonly used ratio, without the risk-free rate of return), but it
does give some measurement of risk and reward, and is better than using
only net profits for comparing results.
The pattern to see in Figure 2.4, which plots the profit factor against the
efficiency ratio, is that there is a general tendency for the profit factor to
move in the same way as the ratio, shown along the bottom axis. Granted,
there is a large blob in the middle of the chart, reflecting the variance of
results when the ratio is in the middle of the range. Remember that moving
average profits can vary based on other price patterns, so that noise will
not be a perfect description of expected results. However, the extremes
conform to our expectations. The lower left part of the chart shows that the
worst performance is associated with the lowest ratio, and the upper right
shows that the best trend performance has the highest ratios. The lower left
markets are the Russell and S&P, and the upper right are soybeans and
Eurodollar interest rates.
FIGURE 2.4 Dispersion of profit factors for 10-day moving average test.
Isolating the equity index markets gives a clearer example of this
relationship. If we plot the ratio against the profit factor, we see fewer
points but a clear pattern from the lower left to the upper right (see Figure
2.5). The three lower points are the Russell, S&P, and DJIA, showing
losses, while the upper points are the DAX, Kospi, and Topix, all
profitable. As mentioned earlier, the Kospi and Topix might benefit from a
combination of lower liquidity and/or larger commercial trading.
FIGURE 2.5 Dispersion of profit factors for 10-day moving average, index
markets only.
DETERMINING THE STRATEGY
What was the purpose of all this analysis? We can see from the index
markets that high ratios are profitable with a trend-following approach. We
can infer that the low ratios will be profitable using a mean-reverting
strategy. At least we can say that a trend-following strategy should not be
used with those markets showing the greatest amount of noise, the lowest
ratios.
Naturally, there are times when even the noisiest market, the Russell, will
produce a profit with a moving average of some calculation period. But a
few profits do not make a successful trading program, and the underlying
premise is very important. Our premise is that the Russell should not be
traded with a trend system but most likely will be successful with a meanreverting
one.
The Time Frame Helps
The calculation period for the trend or mean-reverting method can greatly
help the performance of the strategy. This is based on the observation that
longer moving averages, or lower-frequency data (weekly instead of daily,
daily instead of hourly), implicitly smooths the data. Chartists can
recognize the trend in prices more easily when they see a weekly chart
rather than an hourly one.
Based on this premise, a trend system is more likely to be successful if
the calculation period is longer, for example, 40, 60, or 80 days, and a
mean-reverting system is best when using calculation periods from 3 to 8
days. This could be why macrotrend strategies use calculation periods
from 40 to 200 days, with most of them closer to 80 days. Mean reverting
is often applied to intraday moves.
We conclude that noise appears to be a greater part of price movement
when seen up close, and the trend is more visible when viewed from afar.
When choosing a strategy, the nature of the market (the underlying noise)
and the calculation time frame are both critical.
Volatility Is Still Important
It was mentioned earlier that volatility is removed from the noise
calculation. But volatility is a critical ingredient for mean-reverting or any
short-term trading. Without volatility, the individual trades may not exceed
the cost of doing business, commissions, and slippage. This will be an
important issue in the chapters that follow.
Robustness of the Noise Measurement
The concept of fractal efficiency is particularly important because it claims
to be robust. That is, whether we look at very high frequency data (such as
intraday, hourly prices) or low frequency (weekly), the relative price noise in
all markets should remain about the same. To show this, the average noise
for the past 10 years was calculated using 8-, 20-, 40-, and 80-day periods
for a wide range of futures markets, shown in Table 2.3 . The four columns
have been sorted with the highest noise at the top for each of the
calculation periods. From our previous work, we expect the equity index
markets to have the most noise and the interest rates the least noise.
TABLE 2.3 Futures markets sorted by their average noise over 10 years
based on four calculation periods. Those markets with the highest noise
are on top.
In fact, the results in Table 2.3 confirm our expectations, although we
also find other information. Viewing it in the most general sense, the shortterm
maturities, the short sterling, the European Interbank Offered Rate
(Euribor), and Eurodollars are all consistently at the bottom, showing the
least noise and the most trend. As the maturities get longer, the prices
show increasing noise, although with only a few exceptions the interest rate
markets all remain in the lower half of the table.
We see a similar case for equity index markets, clustering near the top
of the table. The DAX is the bottom market in each column, indicating the
least noise of that group.
As we look from the fastest calculation period, 8 days, to the slowest, we
see a shift upward of the longer-term U.S. interest rates. This seems to
reflect the trendiness of the past 10 years. The U.S. 30-year bonds spent a
number of years moving sideways with relatively low volatility, even when
the short-term rates continued lower.
Most other markets scatter throughout the center of the table with the
exception of palladium, which is consistently classified as very low noise.
We take one last look at the trend performance using both noise and a
moving average taken over the same calculation periods, 20, 40, and 80
days. We find that doubling the calculation period gives a better test
sample. As before, we scatter the results using the average noise as the
bottom scale and the information ratio as the left scale, shown in Figures
2.6a, b, and c. Figure 2.6a seems to have no particular pattern, but that
can easily be caused by a mixture of poor performance because 20 days
is not long enough to capture macrotrends in most of these futures
markets.
FIGURE 2.6 (a) Results of a 20-day trend applied to 25 markets and
scattered by average noise and information ratio. (b) Results of a 40-day
trend. (c) Results of an 80-day trend.
The 40- and 80-day calculation periods show an increasingly clear
pattern where higher values of noise (less noise) produce better returns,
indicated by a higher information ratio. Any information ratio below zero
indicates a loss. The three diamonds at the far right are the results of the
three short-maturity futures markets, Euribor, short sterling, and
Eurodollars. The negative ratios are generally the equity index markets, but
the 80-day trend shows that 30-year bonds and gold also generated net
losses from 2000.
CAPITALIZING ON THE TREND OF
NOISE
We've looked at the long-term average of noise for each of the markets.
These averages create an orderly ranking that shows which strategy is
most likely to succeed. But over the short, 8-day calculation period, the
noise of any market can vary considerably. Figure 2.7 shows the SPX,
along with the 8-day efficiency ratio for the first quarter of 2009. During this
interval, the SPX drops to its lowest point in March 2009, and the efficiency
ratio is seen to peak twice and touch bottom four times. The average of the
ratio for the period in the chart is 0.37, although it ranges from near zero,
0.01, to 0.87 in February.
FIGURE 2.7 SPX with an 8-day efficiency ratio, first quarter, 2009.
Observing the patterns on a chart always gives rise to hopeful ideas. In
this case, we see that the S&P dropped twice, from about 930 to 800 in
January and again from near 850 to under 700 in February and March. At
the same time, the ratio shows two insightful patterns. After the ratio peaks
in mid-January, it drops quickly and stays low during an interval where the
S&P goes sideways. Then, just after February 13, 2009, it starts up
sharply, indicating an improved trend, and stays high through the entire
period when the S&P drops 150 points. Can the trend of the ratio be used
to switch from a trending strategy to a mean-reverting one? Or can it be
used to tell us when to stand aside using either strategy?
It's an interesting idea that will be left to the reader to pursue. Once such
a pattern is observed, we each approach a solution differently, and this is
an exercise worth some investment of time.
1. Prior to this, Mandelbrot published Fractals, Chance and
Dimension (W. H. Freeman, 1977).
Chapter 3
Pairs Trading: Understanding the
Process
Pairs trading is not an industry secret. It is a basic market arbitrage and
can be done by any conscientious trader. It may be that greater
competition in recent years means that you will need to be more selective
about the choice of trades, but the opportunities are still there.
The basic stock market pairs trade begins by choosing two companies
that are fundamentally related. We can use a simple correlation tool, which
we will discuss later, but that's not necessary. By observing the chart of one
company against another we can see that the two companies move in
much the same way, reacting to news in a similar manner.
The best pairs trades will be between direct competitors, such as Dell
and Hewlett-Packard. There may be periods of time when prices move
significantly apart, but even during those intervals, there will be a lot of
similarity. We don't want the two stocks to track each other too closely,
because that also means there is limited opportunity. We also need to be
vigilant about structural changes in one of the companies and how that
might affect their relationship to other companies in the same industry. A
price jump following an earnings release is not a structural change. Most
often the first chip manufacturer to report indicates that other
manufacturers in that industry should follow with similar performance.
The trade itself will sell the stronger stock and buy the weaker, looking
for their prices to correct, or come back very close to each other. When
they do correct, the trade is exited. The number of shares traded for each
stock will be calculated to equalize the risk of the long and short. This
approach is the basic statistical arbitrage (stat-arb) trade. What differs
from trader to trader is the selection of pairs, the size of the distortion
being targeted, the size of the positions, and the exit criteria, but not the
concept.
THE PROCESS
This section steps through the process of developing a pairs trading
strategy. A similar procedure is used for the other strategies in the
chapters that follow, but it is important to understand how it comes about.
There are clear rules to be followed; otherwise, you cannot have
confidence that the final system will work. Both our computers and
development tools are extremely powerful, perhaps too powerful. It is easy
to beat the problem into submission. Our challenge is to keep it simple and
robust. We must think of the problems that can be encountered in advance
and use our data and tools wisely. At the end, we will review the process
and comment on critical steps.
An important advantage of a rule-based system is that, once
implemented for one pair using a spreadsheet or computer program, it can
be easily extended to others. That will allow us to test for robustness. If we
are doing it correctly and it worked on Dell and Hewlett-Packard, then it
should work on similarly related pairs. Once we have a number of pairs
checked out successfully, hopefully in different sectors, you have gained
confidence in the method as well as diversification.
All trades will be entered and exited on the daily closing prices, although
that won't be necessary for actually trading. You could enter prices into the
spreadsheet at any time during the day, perhaps 15 minutes after an
economic report when volatility is high, and enter a trade any time there is
a distortion that satisfies our minimum threshold.
We will try to approach each problem as we would without any foresight
as to what is the correct solution or the best markets. When exploring a
new method, there are always false starts. Each time we uncover a
problem, we learn more about the process and the solution.
THE BASICS
We'll start by choosing four U.S. airline stocks, which we intuitively believe
react to the same economic fundamentals. If the economy is strong and
there is more disposable income, then more people fly for both business
and pleasure, and if the economy is weak, they stay put. The candidates
are American, Continental, Southwest, and U.S. Airways, all large
companies, with Southwest the only domestic carrier. We will use
American and Continental as the primary example in the following
sections. They were chosen because both had the maximum amount of
data and both were major domestic and international carriers. They turn
out to be neither a very good example nor a very bad example. By the time
you read this, one or the other of the airlines may have a different name,
but that won't affect our results.
FIGURE 3.1 The price history of American Airlines (AMR) and Continental
Airlines (CAL), 10 years ending July 2010.
If we show American (AMR) and Continental (CAL) on the same chart
(Figure 3.1), we can see the similarity in their price movement. Most of the
time Continental trades above American, but there are obvious differences
that could be turned into either profit opportunities or large trading losses.
Most important, we see that on September 11, 2001, both companies took
a plunge of more than 50%, based on the public perception that no one
was ever going to get onto an airplane again. For those readers who are
good with spreadsheets, the correlation of the daily changes over the 10
years is .94, quite high. Remember that correlations always use the price
differences and not the actual prices and that the differences are actually
returns and are best calculated as a percentage change,
It may also seem from the chart that the volatility of Continental is higher
than that of American. That would be a good guess because the average
price of Continental was higher than that of American during this period.
But that's not the case. Over the full 10 years, Continental had an
annualized volatility of 69% while American was 81%. Because the
volatility is calculated in the standard way used by financial institutions,
where the daily returns are percent changes, these values are somewhat
self-adjusting to the differences in price.
Time Perspective
We need to decide if our trading should target a few big profits or many
small ones. My own preference is for many faster trades, even though a
series of small losses could total the same as one large loss generated by
a longer-term strategic trade. With faster trading, it is possible to have
more consistent performance because the individual trade risk is smaller.
If you hold a trade for a long time, then the risk increases proportionally (but
not linearly) with the holding period, so it's not possible to have a long-term
trade with low risk. More trades also give greater statistical confidence.
If we think of the conclusions given in Chapter 2, “The Importance of
Price Noise,” we should remember that operating in a shorter time period
emphasizes price noise, and taking a longer view emphasizes the trend.
Pairs trading assumes that differences between the two stocks will be
corrected; therefore, we are dealing with noise. Using a shorter time
horizon will benefit us.
A more intuitive, convincing argument may come from looking at the
chart of the two stocks in Figure 3.1. It appears that, about September
2000, Continental moves higher while American moves lower. This is
certainly a big opportunity. Within two weeks, prices converge again, and
by 9/11 they are virtually the same. Buying American and selling
Continental short would have been highly successful. In August 2006, we
get another separation, where Continental gains over American, and
Continental appears to remain higher until August 2008. In this case, if you
consider that the size of the risk increases with time (as do the profits), we
have another argument in favor of shorter trades.
The principal argument against frequent trading is the increase in cost.
More trades mean accumulated execution slippage and commissions, and
a shorter time frame also means less volatility and smaller profits per
trade. Volatility is the main enemy of many of these strategies, which are
mean reverting. Prices must move apart by some minimum amount to offer
enough profit opportunity.
Note on Data and Costs
Be sure to check that all the data are in the same format. Even within the
same data service, the stocks series that are automatically created may
be without any decimal points, so a share price of $22.15 could be shown
as 2215. Data downloaded specifically by the user, for example, a stock
that is not in the S&P 500, may be shown in decimal form, such as 14.50.
For most programs to work correctly, all of the data should be in the same
format.
The examples that follow using stocks do not reflect any costs. Instead,
the results will always show the returns per share. Costs vary considerably
from trader to trader, with professionals paying less than $0.001 per share.
You will need to decide whether the potential returns are sufficient given
your own costs.
Correlations and Common Sense
In expectation of adding U.S. Airways (LCC) and Southwest Airlines (LUV)
to the mix of pairs when we are done with American and Continental, we
will look at data beginning on September 29, 2005, when U.S. Airways
began trading on the NYSE. We'll call that the beginning of our test period.
When we compare the correlations of the price changes for the four
companies (see Table 3.1 ), we get a wide range, with American,
Continental, and U.S. Airways closely tracking one another, but Southwest
very different. We can explain this because Southwest is exclusively a
domestic carrier, but we don't know if that will make a difference to our
trading. It will give us the opportunity to see if the greatest profits come
from markets that are more or less correlated while still in the same
transportation group. Although we're sure from the 0.766 correlation that
American and Continental will correct any differences, we don't yet know if
those divergences may turn out to be too small for practical trading, or if
the correlations are good but the volatility needs to be watched.
TABLE 3.1 Cross-correlations of American (AMR), Continental (CAL),
U.S. Airways (LCC), and Southwest Airlines (LUV) from September 2005
to February 2009. Southwest is clearly different.
If we were fundamental traders, we could explain that Southwest has a
different, discount business model. We could remember the news articles
that credited Southwest with extensive jet fuel hedging success. But we
can't confirm these statements, and we don't know when an average jetfuel
price that's 40% under the market will turn around to become 10% over
the market. We do know that Figure 3.2 shows a very different price
pattern for Southwest than for the other airlines. Again, we'll let the trading
results confirm whether it should be included in the pairs trading mix. For
now, we can feel comfortable that three of the four airlines have similar
price moves; therefore, they are candidates for pairs trading.
FIGURE 3.2 Comparison of four airlines, September 29, 2005, to January
30, 2009.
Percentage Deviation
The basic approach to pairs trading is to look at the percentage
differences in the daily moves of the two stocks, in this case AMR minus
CAL. When the difference is too high, we sell short the stronger (AMR) and
buy the weaker (CAL); if too low, we buy AMR and sell short CAL. Based
on our observation and the correlations, we can expect this divergence to
correct within a few days.
Before you express concern about short selling, it is very common today
for actively traded stocks; however, at the end of the airline example, we
will show how to use sector ETFs as a simple alternative for the short side.
As an example of using percentage differences, suppose that American
gained 1.5% today and Continental gained 0.9%. Then the difference
(AMR – CAL) would be +0.6%. We now need to know if +0.6% is unusually
high. To gain a better understanding of the range of these values, we
calculated them for our test period and got the results shown in Figure 3.3.
FIGURE 3.3 Daily percentage difference in American Airlines (AMR) and
Continental (CAL).
We can see from this chart that the volatility of the AMR-CAL differences
changes drastically over the four years. First, from the beginning in
September 2005 until September 2006 volatility was uniform, with daily
percentage differences ranging from about +5% to –5%, with a maximum
of about 8%. For the next 9 months, volatility dropped. Had we been
trading before July 2007, we might have created the following trading rules:
Sell short AMR and buy CAL on the close when the daily change
in AMR exceeds the change in CAL by 2.5%.
Sell short CAL and buy AMR on the close when the daily change
in CAL exceeds the change in AMR by 2.0%.
Se lling AMR with a 2.5% threshold and selling CAL with a 2.0%
threshold accounts for the upward bias we can see on the chart, where the
maximum was 8% and the minimum about 5%.
After May 2007, volatility begins to increase until by mid-2008 when the
maximum difference has become 17.5%, far greater than the previous 8%.
Had we sold AMR at a 2.5% difference over CAL using our previous rules
we would have, theoretically, been holding the same trade when the
difference reached 15%. But that would never have happened. When the
trade reached 10%, we would have all rushed for the exit, forgetting the
opportunities. Without going through the tedious exercise of figuring out all
the trades, we can see that the basic method has too much risk and too
much variability. This method may have worked during the 1960s, but it is
not the one we want now.
It is also good to see that we used the chart to decide buy and sell levels
that were not symmetric. These levels, 2.5% and 2.0%, clearly fit the
pattern but are not a good way to find a solution. Generally, we see this
skew in the prices because the stocks have been moving in one direction,
in this case up, or the volatility of one stock is greater than the other. When
prices change direction so does the skew. A solution that is going to last
will need to be more robust, and the safest approach will always be a
symmetric solution.
Changing volatility is also a good lesson in why using more data is
better than fewer data for testing. If you were to choose only the last year of
data, then you get a narrow, unrealistic idea of market patterns. Whatever
program you develop will have a short life span. When you see a structural
change in the volatility, you need to consider a more dynamic way to adjust
to the market. In Figure 3.3, there are three distinct volatility regimes:
moderate, low, and high. By finding one method that adjusts to these
situations, you can create a more robust approach.
What is needed is a way to adapt the entry levels to changes in market
volatility. We not only are concerned with increased volatility and the
associated increased risk but also realize that if volatility falls, as it did in
2006, and we're waiting for a 2.5% difference for an entry trigger, then we
could wait months before seeing a new trade. The problem needs to be
solved for both increasing and decreasing volatility.
Relative Differences
The solution to adapting to changing volatility is to recognize relative
differences. One method of showing relative differences is to use a
momentum indicator, such as relative strength (RSI), stochastic, or
moving average convergence-divergence (MACD). They all accomplish
the same thing in slightly different ways. In our examples, we'll use the
stochastic indicator because it is easier to calculate and, interpreted
correctly, will give you the same results. In addition, it has less lag than the
other indicators. The basic calculation for the stochastic is
where Ct is today's close, min(Ln – days) is the minimum price (the lows of
the day) over the past n days, and max(Hn – days) is the maximum price (the
highs of the day) over the past n days. The denominator is then the
maximum to minimum price range of the past n days. The stochastic
indicator actually shows the positioning of today's close within that range,
essentially expressed as a percent measured from the low of the n-day
range to the high of that range.
The value of the stochastic can vary from 0 to 100. If the past range for
AMR was from $22.00 to $18.00 and the close is now at $19.00, then the
stochastic will be 25. If today's close was a new high, the stochastic would
be 100.
For those familiar with this momentum indicator, our definition is for the
raw stochastic. Most trading software show a much slower version, created
by taking the 3-day average of the raw stochastic, then again taking the 3-
day average of that result, giving essentially a 4.5-day lag (half of 9 days).
For our purposes, that creates an indicator that is too slow.
Table 3.2 gives an example of the raw stochastic calculation from the
beginning of the data. The calculation period is 10 days; therefore, the first
9 data rows are blank. Beginning in row 11 on February 3, 2000 (row 1
has the headings), column H shows the high of the past 10 days =
max(B2:B11) and column I shows the 10-day low = min(C2:C11). Using the highs
and lows of the past 10 days, we can calculate the AMR stochastic in
column J as = (D11-I11)/(H11-I11). Once both AMR and CAL stochastics are
calculated in columns J and M, the differences = J11-M11 are entered into
column N.
TABLE 3.2 Stochastic indicators created from AMR and CAL daily prices.

If we calculate the traditional 14-day stochastic (usually the nominal
calculation period found on charting services) for AMR and CAL during the
second half of 2007, we get the picture shown in Figure 3.4. Both markets
move in a similar way between 0 and 100; however, they do not reach
highs at the same time, and some of the lows are also out of phase.
Without those differences, there would be no opportunity. Based on this
view of the divergence in the two stocks, we can devise trading rules that
profit from it. Although we think that we can see where the momentum
values are farthest apart, the first step is to show those differences more
clearly. That can easily be done by plotting the differences between the
AMR and CAL stochastics, as shown in Figure 3.5. We'll refer to that as
the stochastic difference (SD), in column N on the spreadsheet.
Stochastic Difference
Figure 3.5 shows both the annualized volatility and the stochastic
differences for AMR and CAL. The second half of 2008 was chosen
because of its historically high volatility, when everyone thought that the end
of the world was coming. It is interesting to see that the stochastic
difference did not peak at the same place as the volatility spike. Instead,
the bottom line in Figure 3.5, M1-M2, shows that the stochastic differences
peaked in May 2008 at a value of about 50 and had numerous lows of
about –50 throughout the year. The low levels are more consistent than the
peaks, but this is only six months, or 5% of the test period.
Experience teaches us that we should not attempt to fine-tune these
levels or bias our trading to expect the extension on the upside to be
smaller than the downside. At some point, whatever causes these charts to
be asymmetrical will change. Those readers familiar with trend-following
systems may have noticed that during the 1990s, when there was a clear
bull market in stocks, long positions would have been held longer and
shown larger profits than short sales, making the performance noticeably
asymmetrical. If we had decided to optimize only the long positions or bias
our trading to the long side, the result would have been to hold the longs
even longer and possibly not trade any shorts. That would have been a
financial disaster after 2000, when prices headed down for more than
three years. If we don't know when the next major economic cycle will start,
using symmetrical trading rules is the safest approach.
FIGURE 3.4 14-day stochastic momentum of AMR and CAL, second half
of 2007.
FIGURE 3.5 The stochastic difference (SD) of the AMR stochastic minus
the CAL stochastic, shown with the AMR and CAL prices during the
second half of 2008.
Exits
When planning a trading strategy around these numbers, our nominal exit
should always be at a stochastic difference of zero, indicating that the
relationship between the two stocks has gone back to equilibrium. For
some traders, that might be unnecessarily strict. We should also consider
exiting shorts above zero and exiting longs below zero. This would cut
profits short but assure us that we would safely exit more often.
There is always a temptation to hold a short position until the stochastic
difference moves from the high entry to the low point, where we would
reverse and enter a long position, for example, from a stochastic value of
80 down to 20. Profits would be much bigger and transaction costs less
important. But that's not the way the market works. A relative distortion, as
we recognize with the momentum indicator, is likely to return to near
normal but has no reason to reverse. In our 6-month example, CAL tends
to lead AMR, then fall back to normal, and then lead again. We would be
exposing ourselves to very high risk unnecessarily if we waited for AMR to
lead CAL in order to exit a long position.
Implicit Bias
As we look at Figure 3.5 and consider the rules, we see that if we sell
above 45 and buy below –45, there is only one short trade and four longs. If
we choose ±25, there would be a lot more trades on both sides, but that
would force us to hold those trades with larger unrealized losses. Those
are classic trade-offs that we will consider later in the development
process.
None of the strategy rules will consider asymmetrical parameters. There
has always been a bias in the stock market because history has shown a
steady increase in the average price of a stock or an index. One example
of this bias is the traditional definition of a bull and bear market. A bear
market begins when the DJIA turns down by 20%, and a bull market begins
after the DJIA turns up by 20%. However, after a decline of 50%, a rally of
20% is actually a recovery of only 10% of the value lost in the downturn.
Then the threshold can be twice as large to enter a bear market as a bull
market, a definite bias toward the upside.
The 2008–2009 stock market decline of 50% points out that those
upward biases may have provided small improvements during good times
and large losses when they go wrong.
The rules in this strategy, and others given later in this book, will all use
symmetrical thresholds. A short sale signal will occur when the stochastic
difference moves above 40, and a buy on the first day that the stochastic
falls below –40. Exits will initially be at retracements to zero.
TABLE 3.3 AMR-CAL trades based on the difference in stochastics,
2008.
Results for Stochastic Difference
In tracking the performance, there are five trades during this period with a
total return of $350.39, or $0.468 per share (as shown in Table 3.3). At that
level of return, the method would still be very profitable after costs and
slippage. However, this is a single example and not typical of a wide range
of performance.
The list of trades also confirms the rules. In the first trade, on January 14,
2008, the stochastic values were both very positive, but CAL was much
stronger than AMR, 82.2 compared with 41.8. The difference, AMR – CAL,
was –40.5, below the –40 threshold to trigger a buy of AMR and short sale
of CAL. On February 4, 2008, the stochastic difference moved above zero,
and the trade was exited for a loss. Four of the five trades during 2008
were triggered on CAL being stronger than AMR.
It shouldn't be surprising that there are profits because we picked our
buy and sell thresholds off the charts and then just verified that those values
generated profits. The advantage of this method is that the stochastic
should adapt to many different price patterns, including changes in
volatility. Remember that the intention is to find a method that would adapt
to the more volatile period beginning June 2007. In this first test, the
threshold values of ±40 generated only five trades in a year. We would
prefer to trade more often.
Different Position Sizes
Notice that the sizes of the CAL positions are different from the nominal
AMR position of 100 shares. That is because a volatility adjustment was
used. As we go through this process, the size of the two positions will be
an important way to control the risk and improve the chance for a profit. In
this case, a rolling volatility measurement was used.
To find the volatility-adjusted position size, we begin by assigning a fixed
size to one leg. In the previous example, AMR always traded 100 shares.
Next, we calculate the average true range (ATR) of each leg, measured
over the same n days. For any day, the true range, TR, is the largest of the
high minus the low, the high minus the previous low, and the previous close
minus the low:
The ATR is the average of the past n values of TR. Then, if the ATR of
AMR was $0.50 and over the same period the ATR of CAL was $1.00, we
would trade twice as many shares of AMR as we would CAL. It is
important to remember that this is a critical step in trading two markets
simultaneously. They must each have the same risk exposure. If you miss
this step, there is no way to correct for it later. This will be discussed in
more detail in the section “Alternative Methods for Measuring Volatility,”
later in this chapter.
Had we not adjusted the position size of each leg, the only alternative
would have been to trade 100 shares each, with the results shown in Table
3.4. This method returns a total profit of $178.00 with $0.18 per share
compared with the volatility-adjustment method of $350.89 and $0.47 per
share. Of course, this is a very small test period, and the results could have
greatly favored taking equal positions, especially if it was the CAL leg that
was most often profitable. But the performance would have depended on
the chance that the leg with higher volatility was the one generating profits,
which is not good risk management. There is no substitute for volatilityadjusting
each leg of the trade.
TABLE 3.4 AMR and CAL with equal position size.
Alternate Approach to Position Size
Alternate Approach to Position Size
The idea behind volatility-adjusted position sizes is that every trade should
have an equal risk. That way you maximize diversification and are not
making the unconscious decision that one trade is better than another.
In the previous process, we started by fixing the position size of one leg
at 100 shares and then finding the number of shares in the other leg that
caused risk to be equal. An alternative approach is to assign some
arbitrary investment size to each stock, say, $10,000, and then:
Calculate the average true range of the stock price over the past
20 days.
Divide the nominal investment size by the average true range.
Th e result is the number of shares needed to equalize the risk of the two
stocks. These can be done for any number of stocks, and all will have been
adjusted to the same risk. When you're done testing using these position
sizes, the results can be scaled up or down by multiplying all stock
positions by the same factor to reach a target volatility or an investment
amount.
Testing a Range of Stochastic Values
At this point, it is impossible to avoid some amount of optimization. We
are hopeful that the underlying premise of the method is good, and we
would like to vary the calculation period as well as the entry and exit
parameters to see if we can increase the number of trades, as well as the
returns. The pattern of these relationships is predictable, so we might be
on safe ground. For example, as we make the entry thresholds farther
apart, we will get fewer trades, the profits should be bigger (if we keep the
exit at the same level), and the risk should get larger because we're
holding the trade longer.
If we hold the entry levels constant and make the exit points closer, then
we should increase the number of trades, reduce the size of the profit, and
decrease the overall risk because the trades will be held for a shorter time.
We will also vary the calculation period for the stochastic indicator. As
that value gets larger, the indicator will reach its extremes less often,
generating fewer trading signals. A shorter calculation period will produce
more signals. We would like to have as many signals as possible but
recognize that a faster frequency of signals will also have smaller price
moves and consequently smaller potential profits. There are always tradeoffs
that must be balanced. In addition, we know from Chapter 2 that when
we look at shorter time intervals, we see more price noise. We expect that
for this mean-reverting method, shorter calculation periods should favor our
trading strategy.
Because we are testing different combinations and must be concerned
about overfitting, we will watch carefully to see that the pattern of results
has the shape that we expect and that the numbers do not jump around.
Using In-Sample and Out-of-Sample Data
If we were working in completely uncharted waters, that is, developing a
strategy from a new concept, we would want to divide the data into insample
and out-of-sample partitions. We would then test all of the new
concepts on the in-sample data until we were satisfied with the rules and
the test results. Finally, we would run our best rules and parameters
through the unseen, out-of-sample data. We expect the results to be worse
than the in-sample performance because there are many more patterns
that we could not have anticipated. Still, if the ratio of return to risk of the insample
test was 2.0 and the out-of-sample test was 1.2, we would
consider that a success. It would be ideal if the out-of-sample data
performed the same as the in-sample data, but that rarely happens
because there is always some degree of overfitting, even if it is
unconscious and unintended.
However, if the out-of-sample test is a complete failure, yielding a ratio
near zero, then the method is also a failure. You cannot review the new
results, find the problem area, and fix it, because that is feedback. You no
longer have true out-of-sample data, and there is good reason to believe
that your improvements are simply overfitting the data more and will result
in trading losses.
Specifying the Tests
Our primary measurement statistic is the information ratio (annualized
return divided by annualized volatility), and the results are shown in Table
3.5. The overbought entry levels are varied from stochastic values of 50 to
30 and the corresponding exit levels from 10 points under the entry to zero.
Rather than test only the pair AMR-CAL, we will show the average of all
tests for the combinations of four airlines:
LCC—CAL
LCC—AMR
LCC—LUV
AMR—CAL
AMR—LUV
CAL—LUV
We take this approach because the choice of parameters should work
for all the pairs, not just for AMR-CAL. When we look at average results of
all tests, we won't be able to see how the individual pairs performed, but
we will know if one set of thresholds is better than others when applied to
all markets. This will prevent us from looking too closely at the detail. We
also expect to get smoother results by averaging the ratios for each pair.
Which Parameter First?
There are three parameters to test: the stochastic calculation period, the
entry threshold, and the exit threshold. The general rule is that we test the
parameter that has the most effect on performance. That seems to be the
stochastic calculation period. We should expect that longer periods (larger
values) will generate fewer trades. The entry threshold will also be a major
factor in determining the number of trades: The greater the threshold, the
fewer the trades. The exit threshold will have only a small effect on the
frequency of trading. If we exit sooner, then there is a chance that prices
will reverse and allow us to enter again, but that should happen much less
often. Then the order of testing will be
Stochastic calculation period
Entry threshold (with exit set to zero)
Exit threshold
To begin, we need to pick some reasonable values, which will be a
calculation period of 20, an entry of ±60, and an exit of zero. We expect
that the best calculation period will be less than 20 and the entry may be
less than 60. Exiting at zero is normal, but exiting a short at 10 might be
safer. Table 3.5 shows the results of these tests beginning in January
2000; however, some of these stocks start later due to mergers.
TABLE 3.5 Initial tests of four airline stocks, six pairs.
The ratio will be the key statistic for determining success or failure. In
Table 3.5 , the ratio increases in a reasonably orderly way as the
momentum calculation period declines from 20 to 6, as shown in Figure
3.6. The calculation periods are shown along the bottom and the ratios
along the left scale. Periods of 10 and lower are clearly better, with 7 the
best. The period 7 also had the highest profits per share, which is critical
to success. We could have tested all calculation periods, but the difference
between 20 and 19 days (a change of 5%) would not be as significant as
the difference between 7 and 8 (a change of 14%), so we've skipped
some values at the high end and included all of them at the lower end.
FIGURE 3.6 Information ratios for tests of momentum calculation periods.
We expect that everyone would choose the period 7, not just because it
has the highest ratio but because it falls in the middle of the profitable set
of tests. It is best to avoid the value 6 because faster trades are likely to
have smaller profits per trade. The 10-day test may be better because of
the profits per trade, but readers will need to perform these tests
themselves to verify the results, and they can make other choices at that
time. You can use these results to convince yourself that this is a viable
approach to trading, but you can never simply accept someone else's work
without verifying it yourself.
TABLE 3.6 Airline pairs with entry threshold of ±50.
TABLE 3.7 Airline pairs with entry threshold of ±40.
The greatest concern is the average number of trades. Because U.S.
Airways (LCC) started trading in October 2005, all combinations using
LCC will be more than 5 years shorter than the other pairs. If we consider
all pairs trading for the full 10 years, an average of 36 trades is only 3.6
trades per year. That may not be enough to hold our attention. One way to
increase the number of trades is to lower the entry threshold below ±60;
however, by lowering the threshold, we will also expose ourselves to
greater risk because we will enter more trades before they reach their
extremes. Tables 3.6 and 3.7 show the results of lowering the threshold to
±50 and ±40. The averages show that the number of trades increases
along with all of the other statistics—the annualized rate of return, per
share return, and information ratio—but the entry threshold of ±50 is
noticeably better than the threshold of ±40. For the threshold of ±50, more
of the individual pairs were profitable (see the far right column) than with
the entry threshold of ±40. Calculation periods of 10 and lower are still
best, and 7 is again the peak performer.
The number of trades has increased by making the threshold lower, but
the profits per share are, on average, at only $0.082, which is below what
we believe is a safe margin of error, given execution costs. We would
consider testing the exit level of 10, compared to zero, to assure us that we
exit the trade more often. But because the profits per share are marginally
small, exiting sooner would reduce those profits, and it would be unlikely
that these stocks would generate a net profit. One answer is to look at the
volatility of the market for each individual stock and trade only when the
volatility is relatively high. That will reduce the number of trades but should
increase the profits per trade. It will probably add risk because there are
fewer trades and less diversification, and risk is always associated with
higher volatility. But low volatility isn't an option if it doesn't produce
sufficient profits.
Before looking at volatility, let's inspect the returns of the individual pairs.
Up to now, we have looked at the average of the tests, which is a good
way to avoid overfitting. But we need to understand the profits per trade.
Table 3.8 shows that results are significantly skewed, with the first two
pairs, U.S. Airways (LCC)–Continental (CAL) and U.S. Airways–American
(AMR), posting very large per share returns, and all other pairs posting
returns that are below what we would consider sufficient for netting a profit.
Still, all pairs are profitable, which can be seen as a good start.
TABLE 3.8 Results of individual pairs for airlines, momentum period 7,
entry threshold ±50, exit threshold 0.
If we go back to the original test that used a ±60 entry threshold, we
expect the profits per trade to increase, although there would be fewer
trades. Table 3.9 shows that results are as expected. The per share results
go up on average, and the LCC-LUV pair increases from 4.1 cents to 12.5
cents, enough to produce a real profit. There are some differences in the
results of the first two pairs, LCC-CAL and LCC-AMR, due to better
entries or few trades, but the gains of those two pairs hold up nicely. The
number of trades drops predictably, as do the net profits. Three of the six
pairs are tradable.
TABLE 3.9 Results of individual pairs for airlines, momentum period 7,
entry threshold ±60, exit threshold 0.
One last approach is to visually inspect the individual net asset value
(NAV) streams. In Figure 3.7a, these results are messy. If we look closer at
the more recent U.S. Airways pairs in Figure 3.7b, the returns are much
more orderly.
FIGURE 3.7 NAVs for (a) all airline pairs and (b) airline pairs using U.S.
Airways (LCC) as one leg.
Are These Results Robust?
Now we come to the difficult part, deciding whether these results are
robust. If they are, then we can comfortably trade these pairs. The answer,
if any, comes partly from a more philosophic view of this process.
On the positive side, the idea of trading distortions between two
fundamentally related stocks is a basic and believable concept. We used a
stochastic indicator to measure the relative momentum of the two stocks
and then found those points where they diverged. This was simply the
difference between the two stochastic indicator values. The larger the
difference that determined the entry threshold, the fewer the trades and the
larger the profits per trade. That is all according to expectations. We exit
when the stochastic values come back together.
When we run a set of tests, varying the calculation period of the
stochastic, we get more trades for shorter holding periods. Again, this is
very normal and conceptually correct if we are trying to emphasize the
price noise. The results are continuous in terms of the number of trades,
profits per trade, and information ratio.
On the negative side, we have clearly tested combinations of
parameters. If we test enough, then some are very likely to be profitable,
but statistics tell us that a small number of profitable results within a larger
set of tests do not have predictive qualities. There are also not as many
trades over the test period as we would like, but that may be the normal
outcome of highly correlated stocks that don't diverge often, rather than just
spurious price moves. And some of the results show very small net profits
and even some losses.
One way to determine robustness is to consider the percentage of
profitable results over all tests. In other words, if we used a reasonable
range of calculation periods for the momentum indicator and reasonable
entry and exit thresholds, and we found the percentage of profitable tests,
then a large percentage would tell us that this method is sound, even
though some returns were small and others large. It would remove the
possibility that this method worked for only a narrow set of conditions. We
find this a strong measurement of robustness.
Another confirmation of robustness is to apply this exact method on
other sectors with similar fundamental relationships. If the results were
similar, then we would be more confident and, at the same time, have
additional pairs to trade that would provide valuable diversification.
For now, we can say that there is nothing wrong with the current results,
but they are not sufficient to draw a conclusion. We would also prefer pairs
that had more trades.
TARGET VOLATILITY
Before moving on, notice that the standard deviation of returns in Table 3.7
is 12% for all pairs. That is called the target volatility. To compare the
returns of different pairs, we need to make the risk equal for each of the
pairs’ NAV streams. We use 12% annualized volatility as the industry
standard.
There are a number of steps needed to equalize the risk of all the pairs
that will be traded. This has the consequence of maximizing diversification
by avoiding the arbitrary allocation of more or less of the investment risk to
any one pair. The first step was to volatility-adjust the two legs so that each
stock in the pair had the same risk exposure. The exact way of doing that
was given in the section “Different Position Sizes.” The next step is to
equalize the risk of each pair relative to each other. To do that, scale the
number of shares traded in each pair to a level that represents a target
volatility, in this case, 12%.
volatility, in this case, 12%.
A 12% target volatility is where the annualized standard deviation of the
daily returns is equal to 0.12. To get to that number after the fact, based on
all data, follow these steps:
Record the daily net profits and losses of both legs of the pairs
trade.
Find the standard deviation of the entire series of profits and
losses.
Multiply that standard deviation by the square root of 252 in
order to annualize.
The investment size necessary to trade pair i with 12% volatility
is
Therefore, if the standard deviation of daily returns is $100, the
annualized volatility is $1,587. For a target volatility of 12%, we
would need an investment of $1,587/0.12 = $13,229 for that
pair.
Create a NAV series by applying the normal formula for the
compounded rate of return, but divide each daily profit or loss
(expressed in dollars) by the investment size calculated in the
last step.
As seen in Table 3.9, the risk for all of the pairs is shown as 12% (the
column headed Std) so that the annualized returns and other statistics can
be compared on an equal footing. The investment in each pair will be
different, depending on its volatility.
Combining Pairs into a Portfolio
This method of adjusting to a common volatility works well for comparing
the performance of individual pairs, but does not work for combining the
pairs into a portfolio. For that we need to have the same performance
volatility for each pair relative to the same investment size. The steps are
nearly the same.
Choose an arbitrary investment or an actual one. If the amount is
$100,000 and there are six pairs, then each pair gets 1/6, or
$16,666.
Divide the dollar value of the daily returns by the investment size
to get the percentage returns each day.
Find the annualized volatility of the returns: the standard
deviation times the square root of 252.
Divide the target volatility, for example, 12%, by the annualized
volatility of this pair, giving us the adjustment factor, AFi.
Multiply all position sizes for the ith pair by AFi.
Th is process adjusts all position sizes for all pairs to create the same
risk for each trade. We also know that the volatility of the portfolio of pairs
will be less than the target volatility due to diversification. Again, we would
want to increase our position sizes to bring the volatility back up to the
target level, but there may not be excess money to allow that. This will be
discussed later in this chapter under “Benefiting from Pseudo-Leverage,”
but it will be most important in the chapters concerned with futures
markets.
Note that a target volatility of 12% means that there is a 16% chance that
we will lose more than 12% and a 2.5% chance that we will lose more than
24% over a one-year period. The target volatility is simply one standard
deviation of the returns; therefore, it has the same properties as a normal
distribution. The comfort range for most traders can be as high as 17%
volatility; for fund managers, it may be as low as 6%.
One of the major limitations in trading stocks is that just because we
want a target volatility of 12% doesn't mean that the system performance
will permit that much leverage. In the stock market, we are limited by
having to pay the full share price, which is not the case with futures or
options. Near the end of this chapter, we will look again at what happens
when the total cost of buying and selling shares exceeds the maximum
investment that we determined in advance was needed to achieve a target
volatility of 12%.
Filtering Volatility
Volatility has been discussed in different ways up to now. Rather than try to
pick buy and sell thresholds based on absolute price differences between
two stocks, we decided to use the difference between two stochastic
values to normalize volatility and make the buy and sell levels adaptive. We
also used volatility to determine the size of the positions traded in the two
legs. By adjusting the position size, we prevented the returns of one stock
from overwhelming the other when one of the stocks had much greater
volatility. We now need to address the relationship between profits and
volatility. It seems reasonable that there is a point where price volatility is
too low to produce a profit. On the other side of that question, we might
want to know if there is a point where volatility is so high that the risk does
not compensate for the returns.
Alternative Methods for Measuring Volatility
The original reason for finding the volatility was for adjusting the position
sizes of the two legs. In the extreme, what if CAL was much more volatile
than AMR, or if CAL was trading at $150 and AMR at $10? Then the
success of every trade would depend entirely on the success of CAL
because both its profits and its losses would overwhelm AMR, if trading an
equal number of shares of each. During this test period, that situation is not
a problem because the prices of both stocks were similar, although CAL
was twice the price of AMR during short periods in the fourth quarter of
2008. We know that, under normal circumstances, there is a direct
relationship between price and volatility; therefore, CAL should be
significantly more volatile than AMR most of the time. We should expect to
trade more shares of AMR than CAL to adjust for that volatility. Our solution
needs to be general because other pairs may not trade near the same
price. In an early section, “Different Position Sizes,” we introduced the use
of the average true range.
The traditional way of measuring annualized volatility, V, uses the
standard deviation of the returns, multiplied by the square root of the
number of data points in a year:
where r are the 1-period returns, over n days. For monthly
returns, we would multiply by However, using only the closing price
differences when the high and low are also available has been shown to
give inferior results. Instead, we'll use the average true range, ATR,
measured over the same n days. For any day, the true range, TR, is the
largest of the high minus the low, the high minus the previous low, and the
previous close minus the low,
The ATR is the average of the past n values of TR.
When we calculate the volatility based on the standard deviation during
the last three quarters of 2008, we find that AMR has a higher volatility than
CAL, even though it is trading at a much lower price. Of course, it is
possible that prices jump around more if one stock is in the news more
than the other. It is also likely that stocks at very low price levels, and in the
news, make moves that are proportionately greater than stocks trading at
higher prices. Regardless, the volatility numbers generated by the
traditional standard deviation method do not seem intuitively correct.
Results are shown in Table 3.10 . For the first trade, we set the AMR
position to 100; then the CAL position is 100 × (.903/.748) = 121. The
position size of CAL is larger because its volatility is lower.
TABLE 3.10 AMR-CAL continuous results during 2008 using annualized
standard deviation to determine position size.
TABLE 3.11 AMR-CAL continuous results during 2008 using average true
range to determine position size.
range to determine position size.
In recalculating volatility using the average true range, we find the
opposite relationship: CAL had significantly higher volatility than AMR.
Where the ATR of AMR was $0.768 in the first trade, the ATR of CAL was
$1.558, twice the amount. This is a remarkable difference, considering
both measurements were based on the same time period. The only
reasonable explanation is that the intraday volatility of CAL was very high,
but it tended to close nearer to its previous close. That is, the closing price
volatility did not reflect the wide price swings that occurred during the
trading day. When we think of volatility, we must consider the intraday price
swings. It is an interesting lesson in volatility, but it may be more
pronounced for shorter calculation periods. But it seems likely that if the
average true range is twice the value of the close-to-close price changes,
the annualized volatility would also be quite different. This brings to mind
that there are many risk calculations based on this traditional volatility
measurement, and they may yield results that are far too low.
Underestimating risk can have serious repercussions. Options traders will
also know that implied volatility is calculated using the same standard
deviation method. Is that value also too low and does that present a trading
opportunity?
Returning to our position size calculation, to normalize the volatility using
the ATR, we calculated the CAL position as 100 × (.768/1.558) = 49. The
smaller position reflects the higher volatility. These results are shown in
Table 3.11. Based on using the annualized standard deviation method, the
sum of the four trades was $529 and $0.61 per share. Using the ATR, the
sum was $478 with $0.78 per share. It's difficult to tell from four trades
which method will produce better results, but we'll stay with the average
true range as a more intuitively robust measurement.
Volatility Threshold Filter
Having settled on a way to measure volatility, we now need to decide if
performance is dependent on the volatility level, that is, are we more likely
to be successful during periods of high or low volatility? Again, we'll use the
ATR as our measure of volatility because we believe it is more robust and
it is intuitively easier to explain. We'll revert to our original example, AMR
and CAL, using a 7 period momentum indicator, but this time we will
reduce the entry threshold to ±40 to increase the number of trades. This
pair was a modest performer because the ratio was not high, but if a
volatility filter works, the results should be improved.
FIGURE 3.8 Surface chart showing the relationship between trade PL and
the volatility of the two stocks, measured using ATR, at the time of trade
entry.
Low Volatility Filter
The first step is to show how the profits for any trade are dependent, if at
all, on the volatility of either stock at the time the trade is entered. We
recorded the entry ATR values, the final trade PL, and the profits per share
and created the three-dimensional surface chart shown in Figure 3.8. This
chart may look a bit bumpy at first, but closer inspection will show a hump
near the middle and lower points around the outside. It's the outside that is
of particular interest. In the left corner, where the volatility of both legs (vol1
and vol2) are at low values, the chart makes its steepest dip. There may be
other areas, but for now we are interested in only this one. We can also
see that, as volatility increases, there is a sharp drop along the right front of
the chart. We may also be able to remove trades with very high volatility,
which translates into risk, but we'll save that for the next section.
The vol1 and vol2 values used in Figure 3.8 are in dollars per share. It
turns out that both AMR and CAL had volatility ranges that were nearly the
same. If we were to use those values to define our threshold and we
wanted to isolate the lower left corner, then we would need to say:
Do not enter any trade if the AMR volatility is less than $1.50 and
the CAL volatility is less than $0.80, based on a 7-day average true
range.
It doesn't take much analysis to realize that we are seriously overfitting
the data by looking at this much detail. We can try to make this more
general by reverting to the traditional annualized standard deviation
measurement. Although we prefer the average true range, that
measurement is very specific to each stock, while we can express the
annualized standard deviation as a single percentage value that makes
sense for every stock price.
For this filter to be triggered, we require that both legs be less than the
volatility threshold. If that occurs at the time of entry, then we do not enter
that trade. In addition, we wait until that trade would have been exited
before we enter another. The reasoning for the entry rule is that low
volatility is expected to produce low per share returns. We did not look at
the case where only one leg was under the low volatility threshold.
Table 3.12 and Figure 3.9 show a sequence of tests from low to high
annualized volatility, beginning at 10%, which did not have any effect, and
ending at 50%, which reduced trades from 98 to 60. The reason that the
annualized volatility reaches such high levels so often is that the
annualizing process uses only seven days of data. During a very volatile
few days, the annualization of those price moves will look unusually high
and cannot be sustained for long.
TABLE 3.12 Results of low volatility entry filter on AMR x CAL show some
improvement but only when 27 trades are removed, 28% of all trades.
FIGURE 3.9 Results of low volatility filter applied to AMR x CAL shows that
removing trades at low volatility increases both returns and per share
profits through 40% annualized volatility.
The low volatility filter was able to increase the profits per share only
from 9.4 cents to 12.8 cents. That may be enough to net a profit after costs,
but it also removed 27 trades to achieve that gain.
High Distortion Filter
A more interesting filter is one that recognizes that large differences in the
volatility of the two legs of a pair cannot easily be resolved by volatility
adjusting, even if it makes sense in theory. For example, if we were to
trade a pair where leg 1 traded at $100 and leg 2 at $2, we would expect
to trade a very large amount of leg 2 for each share of leg 1. Then, if the $2
share were to jump, it might gain 25% or 50% in one day, while that size
move would be nearly impossible for a $100 per share stock. Perhaps this
can be recognized using annualized volatility; however, we have decided
that the ATR is a better measure. Even using annualized volatility, there is
still a large risk of imbalance.
An easy way to recognize that two legs are not compatible is to take the
ratio of the shares needed to be traded after applying volatility adjusting.
We'll call this the distortion ratio. If leg 2 needs to trade 100 shares to
offset the volatility of 10 shares in leg 1, we get a distortion ratio of 0.10,
calculated as
By using the min function, we get the minimum value of the two-share
ratios, regardless of whether leg 1 or leg 2 is bigger. Table 3.13 shows the
results of a small set of tests using the distortion ratio. When the ratio is
0.4, then all trades with share ratios more extreme than 40 to 100 are
filtered. At a ratio of 0.5, all trades with share ratios more extreme than 50
to 100 are filtered. The best results come from a ratio of 0.60, which
means the shares must be no more extreme than 60 to 100, which
essentially puts the restriction on the two legs that they have reasonably
similar volatility—that the volatility of one leg is less than twice the volatility
of the other leg.
TABLE 3.13 AMR x CAL filtered with the high distortion ratio.
FIGURE 3.10 Comparison of filters applied to AMR x CAL shows that the
high-distortion filter was best.
The results of these two filters—the low volatility filter and the distortion
filter—can be seen in Figure 3.10. The NAVs of the original case (No
Filters) are very similar to the low volatility returns. The high-distortion filter
does much better, avoiding a sharp drawdown but generally selecting
better trades. This results in a final NAV above 180 and much higher than
the previous peak at 160, while the other two NAV streams are only able to
return to their previous highs. One concern is that the distortion filter is
removing trades that are only modestly unbalanced, rather than extremes.
That may be another sign of overfitting. Because this method improved
results at every level that was more extreme (where 0.1 is most extreme),
the general solution that works on all pairs may not be as good as this
example.
What We Have Learned from Airline Pairs
We would like to conclude that our premise was correct: low volatility is not
good for this strategy, and two stocks that are out of balance with regard to
volatility present unwanted risk and unstable expectations.
We could fiddle around further with the parameters and volatility filters
and perhaps find a combination that produces enough profit and enough
trades to be worth trading, but that is clearly going in the direction of
overfitting. Some might question whether we have already overfit the
problem, but the concept has been kept fairly clean. So far, we have
Identified a pairs trading opportunity based on a fundamental
market relationship.
Used a relative value measurement, the stochastic, to identify
when two fundamentally related stocks have diverged.
Isolated the entry point based on normal trade-offs, that is,
greater potential but fewer trades if we entered at larger
extremes.
Exited the trade when the relative differences approach or are
equal to zero. We did not consider holding the trade looking for
a reverse distortion.
Adjusted the position sizes to the same volatility using the
average true range, which we considered a more robust
measurement than the annualized standard deviation of the daily
changes.
Applied the same rules and parameters to each pair in our test
sector.
Filtered trades with low volatility to increase profits per share but
also reduced the number of trades.
Removed trades in which the volatility of the two legs were
significantly different, arguing that such a trade presented
unexpected and unreasonable risks.
We believe that low volatility is a problem, but filtering the volatility
removes too many trades. These setbacks are part of the reality of system
development. At each step, there is another problem to solve, but
continuing with specific solutions to each problem will eventually result in
overfitting the data.
The market doesn't hand profits to you. There are some alternative ways
of identifying entry and exit points, but none of them will create larger
profits from low volatility. Unless we choose to believe that the two pairs,
LCC-CAL and LCC-AMR, will perform in the future as they have in the
past, and better than the other airline pairs, we need to refocus on sectors
with greater volatility. At the moment, banking is very active, but share
prices range from exceptionally low for those banks that were hurt in the
subprime crisis (Bank of America) to unusually high (Goldman Sachs and
J. P. Morgan & Company) if they were perceived as safe. That might
produce good profits, but the shares needed to equalize the volatility of
these companies will be highly skewed and could lead to unexpected,
unpleasant consequences. Volatility adjusting might not be enough to
control risk.
Instead, we can turn to the housing construction sector. Although it has
been at the center of the financial crisis, companies have not been bailed
out or nationalized, and stock prices continue to respond to market forces,
but with greater volatility.
HOME BUILDERS
Five of the biggest home builders are Lennar (LEN), Pulte Homes (PHM),
KB Homes (KBH), Toll Brothers (TOL), and Hovnanian (HOV). The first
three are part of the S&P 500. Their stock performance is an excellent
view into the recent mortgage crisis and economic recession. Five
companies give us 10 pairs, with the cross-correlations shown in Table
3.14. The average correlation is .58, which is nearly the same as the
airlines, but there were fewer airline stocks and the correlations were as
low as .39. Figure 3.11 shows the five home builders’ stocks together. The
run-up in prices parallels the real estate market, peaking in 2006. From the
chart, these five stocks seem to be performing the same way, so there is
no reason that we shouldn't use all combinations of them as pairs.
TABLE 3.14 Cross-correlations for home builders, 10 years ending March
2009.
FIGURE 3.11 Prices of five home builder stocks. All five react in a similar
manner to the economic changes.
Testing the Home Builders
We follow exactly the same process to test the home builders as we did for
the airlines. From five related stocks, we get 10 pairs. Each of these pairs
is tested by calculating the individual stochastic values, then taking the
difference in the two stochastic values (SD, the stochastic difference). A
new trade is entered when the difference exceeds our entry threshold,
which, from our previous experience with airlines, should be between 60
and 40 for shorting the pair, and –40 to –60 for buying the pair. Shorting
the pair means entering a short sale in the first leg of the pair and buying
the second leg, while buying the pair means buying the first leg and selling
short the second leg. The stochastic difference is the stochastic of the first
minus the stochastic of the second. No costs were considered in the
process, but results show the profits per share, net of both legs, so that it
should be simple to reduce those results by your expected costs. Table
3.15 shows the results of tests covering a range of calculation periods and
a range of entry criteria.
TABLE 3.15 Average results of 10 home builders varying the momentum
calculation periods from 3 to 14 days and the entry criteria from stochastic
values of 40 to 60.
As with the airlines, tests cover the most recent 10 years. In this case, all
the stocks traded for the full period. Our first concern is the information
ratio (annualized return divided by annualized volatility) resulting from
trading each pair. We want an average ratio greater than 0.25; otherwise,
we know that the final performance will be very erratic, with large
drawdowns.
Table 3.15 shows the most important statistics for the 10 pairs:
LEN—PHM
LEN—KBH
LEN—TOL
LEN—HOV
PHM—KBH
PHM—TOL
PHM—HOV
KBH—TOL
KBH—HOV
TOL—HOV
Co lumns 1 and 2 show the parameters. Column 1 is the momentum
calculation period, ranging from 14 down to 3. The value 3 was included to
show at what point the pattern fails. We must recognize that a stochastic
calculation based on three days will jump from zero to 100 nearly every
other day, making the results erratic. Column 2 shows the entry threshold of
60. Part a of Table 3.15 shows the results for an entry threshold of 60, and
Tables 3.15b and 3.15c show the results of entry thresholds of 50 and 40,
respectively.
The statistics shown in Table 3.15 are the number of trades, the
annualized rate of return (AROR), the profits per trade in dollars, and the
information ratio. We expected the relationship between the parameters to
change in the following ways:
As the calculation period decreases from 14 to 3, there would
be more trades but the profits per share would get smaller. The
less time you hold a trade, the less opportunity there is for gain.
Similarly, we would expect the AROR to decline, but we cannot
forecast the information ratio because both returns and risk will
drop, but we don't know which will drop faster.
As the entry threshold decreases from 60 to 40, we will also get
more trades, but we should see a smaller return per share and
more risk. When a mean-reverting trade is entered sooner, we
can expect prices to move against us both in magnitude and
time. Both of these will affect the ratio. If there are many more
opportunities at the entry thresholds of ±40, those good results
might offset the fewer trades in which the prices continued to
diverge, but we will also not be able to tell the extent of that in
advance.
If we also change the exit threshold, then, as it moves closer to
the entry level (for example, entering a short at 60 and exiting at
0, 10, or 20), the size of the profits will decrease, the number of
profitable trades should increase, and the total number of trades
will increase. If we exit a short sale at 20, not having to wait for
zero, and prices reverse to the upside, we would get another
short sale that we would have missed had we needed to wait for
zero to exit.
Ou r goal is to have very continuous results; that is, our statistics should
move smoothly in one direction as the test parameter values change. We
also need profits per trade that are large enough to net a profit after costs.
Finally, we want enough trades to make it worthwhile to use this strategy,
although that should be reflected in the rate of return. Our confidence in the
results also deteriorates if there are too few trades.
It is easier to see the results as a chart. Starting with Figure 3.12, we
can see that the number of trades increases as the momentum calculation
period decreases. It does this uniformly for the three entry thresholds, but
the number of trades also increases as the entry threshold gets smaller.
The fastest trading combination, an entry threshold of ±40 with calculation
periods of 5 or less, generated an average of more than 100 trades in 10
years. Although that's only 10 per year for each of the 10 pairs, it is enough
to give us confidence in the method.
FIGURE 3.12 Home builders, comparison of the number of trades.
The profits per share may be the most important statistic because,
above all, it tells us whether we can net a profit after costs. In these tests,
shown in Figure 3.13, we see that the pattern is good, but the highest
average profit per share falls below 8 cents. That may be enough for a
professional trader, but we would like it to be higher. When we consider
that the entry threshold of ±40 generated the most trades, we see that it
cleared only 4 cents per share using the faster calculation periods.
Because there were more trades, we can try to be selective by using a
volatility filter.
FIGURE 3.13 Home builders, average profits per share.
The last statistic, the information ratio, is also important because it gives
you an idea of how much risk you will take to get these returns. Figure 3.14
shows that, for the most part, the ratio continues to increase as the
calculation period declines. We can explain this in hindsight by recognizing
that pairs trading, like other mean-reversion strategies, flourishes in
environments of market noise. Chapter 2 pointed out that a closer look at
prices—that is, looking at hourly instead of daily data—accentuated the
noise. Also, using shorter calculation periods focuses on more noise and
less trend. The trend is emphasized by using longer calculation periods
and less frequent data (weekly instead of daily). Figure 3.14 shows that
ratios were above 0.25, our objective, for all calculation periods from 6 and
lower.
FIGURE 3.14 Home builders, average information ratio.
The good news is that the three figures show consistency. As the
calculation period declined, results changed in a very orderly fashion. Even
better, they were nearly all profitable. If you remember, an important
criterion of robustness is that a large number of combinations of
parameters should produce profitable returns, given a reasonable test
range. Our only problem, which could be insurmountable, is that we want
larger profits per share.
Selecting the Threshold Levels
The best choice will be some combination of the number of trades, profits
per trade, and information ratio. We will use the average values of all pairs,
even though looking at the detail of each pair would give us more
information. We think that using the averages is an attempt to avoid
unnecessary overfitting. However, the shape and consistency of the
statistics have convinced us that this is a sound approach, so choosing
any set of parameters, or more than one set, should be safe.
If we think back to the airline tests, we also saw that the performance
ranges were very similar. For airlines, there were fewer pairs, so the
results might be less consistent.
Because we plan to test a low-volatility filter that may remove up to 25%
of the trades, we will choose the calculation period of 4 with an entry
threshold of ±40, one of the fastest trading combinations. We can now look
at the detail of each pair, shown in Table 3.16 . All but one pair, Pulte-KB
Homes, was profitable, and all were reasonably consistent. Only one pair,
Lennar-KB Homes, showed a return of greater than 10 cents per share,
and all had at least 100 trades. The consistency, which is good, removes
the temptation of discarding one or two pairs that performed badly or
selecting a few that had large profits per share. An average ratio of 0.423
is very good if only we can increase the profits per share.
TABLE 3.16 Results of home builder pairs for momentum 4 and entry
threshold ±40.
Low-Volatility Filter for Home Builders
As with the airlines, we can test the low-volatility filter. If results improve, it
will confirm the method that we were unable confirm with fewer airline
pairs. Using the same pairs and parameters shown in Table 3.17 , we
applied the low-volatility filter with values ranging from 0% to 120% and got
the results in Table 3.17. Of course, 120% would be impossible except that
we're using only four days to project an entire year of volatility, so an
unusually volatile interval will produce a very large annualized volatility.
TABLE 3.17 Home builder pairs using momentum 4, entry ±40, and a lowvolatility
filter.
It is easier to see the results of Table 3.17 in Figures 3.15 and 3.16. The
first shows how the number of trades drops and the profits per trade
increase as we filter out more low-volatility trades. However, the highest
per share returns average only about 11 cents, while the number of trades
drops to about 20 for each pair over 10 years, two per year. If we can
accept 7 cents per trade, then we could double the number of trades.
That's still not much.
FIGURE 3.15 The low-volatility filter for home builders shows a steady
drop in trades and a corresponding increase in per share returns as more
trades are filtered out.
FIGURE 3.16 The low-volatility filter for home builders shows a parallel
decline in both returns and the information ratio as more trades are
removed.
Figure 3.16 shows a parallel decline in both the annualized rate of return
and the information ratio as trades are removed using the low-volatility
filter. We can explain that because fewer trades spread over a longer time
period will always reduce the rate of return. Similarly, if the risk of the
individual trades remained the same but the annualized return was lower,
then the information ratio would decline. Those results show that there is
less to earn, but the most important statistics are the profits per share and
the number of trades, both of which are too low to be very interesting.
At this point, we've gained confidence in the method but still need to find
pairs with more volatility or those that allow some form of leveraging.
A Sure Way to Avoid Overfitting
Before moving forward, we must consider whether our selection and
filtering process, no matter how well considered, has resulted in overfitting.
We must continually return to this question if we are to create a successful
trading method. If we have overfitted the data, then our expectations of
profits will never become a reality. One way to avoid this problem is to
reject the idea of selecting one or more parameter sets.
Throughout the development and testing of this pairs model, we showed
the ratios resulting from tests of reasonable entry combinations and the
entire range of possibilities for filtering trades. In almost all cases, the
results were profitable, although those profits varied in a predictable
pattern according to the parameter and filter values. The biggest danger
still lies in selecting one set of parameters to trade. How do we know that it
will be the best set, or even a good set, in the future?
To avoid that question, which probably does not have an answer, why
not trade a number of different parameters, or even all of them? We don't
need to decide on a 4-day stochastic when we can use 4, 5, 6, and 7 days.
If you have a large enough investment, then trading all combinations with
equal allocations could not be considered overfitting. Some combinations
will be better than others, but we know that, over a long period of time, they
all performed well. Your result should be the average performance of all
pairs. Because this performance will vary, the average results should have
less volatility and greater predictability than any one pair that we might
choose. You will also increase your diversification and reduce your
slippage because, for the same pair, trades will occur on different days
and each trade will be smaller.
Benefiting from Pseudo-Leverage
Supposing we are prepared to go forward with small per share returns, we
now have what appears to be a viable pairs trading program. Returns are
high enough to support costs, and the information ratio indicates that risk
is reasonable. We now need to look deeper into one of our original
assumptions: that we wanted to target a portfolio of 12% volatility. That's
important because our returns and our profits per share—actually all the
statistics—scale up and down based on our choice of target volatility.
In the section “Target Volatility,” we calculated the necessary investment
size for each pair by taking the daily net profits and losses (expressed in
dollars or the currency of the stocks), finding the standard deviation,
annualizing it, and then getting the investment size necessary to make that
annualized standard deviation equal to 12% (our choice of target volatility).
We will have to look at some actual numbers to find out whether this is
really possible. In the next chapter, in which we use futures, leveraging the
returns will be much easier, but for stocks it is not always possible to
increase leverage.
Evaluating Leverage for the Pulte–Toll Brothers
Pair
If we create a series of daily dollar returns for the Pulte–Toll Brothers pair
(PMH-TOL), then take the standard deviation of those returns, we get
$26.89. Annualizing that value by multiplying by gives $426.90, then
dividing by 0.12 to find the investment size that yields a 12% volatility gives
an investment of $3,557.50. The question now is, Are there any trades in
which the amount of purchase plus the amount of short-sale exceeds the
investment of $3,557?
Unfortunately, the answer is yes. In Figure 3.17, the daily cost of shares,
also called market exposure, is shown to exceed the investment size
during the period from the first quarter 2004 until about August 2007, or
about 3.5 years out of a little more than 9 years. The maximum cost was
$6,098, 71% higher than our investment. What can be done to save our
strategy?
Raise the Investment Amount. The easiest solution is to
increase the investment size by 71% to $6,098. But we would still
have the same profits and losses, so we would need to multiply
all of our statistics by 0.58 to get the new result. That would
reduce our 10-pair average profits per share from, for example,
$0.11 to $0.0638 for the filtered case, and put it at a marginally
profitable level.
FIGURE 3.17 PMH-TOL total cost of shares (“market exposure”).
Borrow the Excess Investment. Stocks can be leveraged by as
much as 50% by borrowing capital. Because the share cost exceeds
the original investment by amounts varying from very small to 71%,
that money can be borrowed at the current interest rate, say 5%.
Because trades are not held long, funds would not be needed
continuously. Estimating the cost, we have an average excess of
$1,270 (the average of $3,557 and $6,098, less $3,557) for 3.5 years
at 5%, or $222. That added cost represents an adjustment in total
returns of 222/3557, or 6.2%. Then a per share return of $0.11 would
drop to $0.103, a more manageable option.
Cap the Amount Traded. The cost of shares does not always
exceed the original investment size; therefore, an alternative is to limit
each trade to the amount of the investment. For example, if our
investment is $3,000 and the total share value for this trade is $4,000,
then the position size is reduced to 75% of the original amount.
Instead of 100 shares, we trade 75 shares. The amount of this
reduction will vary for each trade, depending on the ratio of actual cost
to investment size. Once the trade is entered, the cost remains the
same until the trade is closed out.
Figure 3.18 shows the results of capping the exposure at the investment
size for the pairs LEN-TOL (Figure 3.18a) and TOL-HOV (Figure 3.18b). In
both cases, capping resulted in much better returns. The capping ratio,
shown as bars across the top of the chart, and read on the right scale,
shows the reduction in the size of the daily position needed to bring the
exposure down to the investment size. Note that the largest losing period in
the original profit/loss stream occurs at the same time that the capping
ratio is most active in reducing the position size. This can be explained in
terms of market volatility.
FIGURE 3.18 Comparison of capped and original PL for (a) LEN-TOL
and (b) TOL-HOV.
In the pairs trading strategy, we not only equalize the risk of both legs but
also enter a larger position when the volatility is lower. This is intended to
give each trade an equal chance to contribute to the returns. However,
when the volatility is low and more positions are entered, the total exposure
has a greater chance of exceeding the investment size.
Because cutting the position size during periods of low volatility makes
such a drastic improvement in performance, we can conclude that those
periods were not good for the strategy. We thought that trades set during
periods of low volatility could be removed using the low-volatility filter, but
that does not seem to have been as effective as letting the exposure
control the process. Table 3.18 shows the results of all 10 home builder
pairs. While the number of total trades remains the same, the cumulative
profits (TotPL) increased by 67%, and the information ratio jumped from
0.424 to 0.996. We could estimate the improvement in the profits per
share by taking the accumulated capping ratio divided by the number of
days. If the capping ratio was effective 30% of the time, and the average
ratio was 0.85 (a 15% reduction), then the net impact would have been
0.30 × 0.15 = .045. We actually estimated the reduction in position size for
LEN-TOL at about 6.5%. By itself, that would not be enough to be a major
change, but combined with a 67% increase in profits, it should net a 75%
increase in the profit per share.
TABLE 3.18 Comparison of capped and original results for 10 home
builder pairs.
Summarizing the Capping Results
Was that just an anomaly, or does capping actually improve performance?
For home builders, the improvement is very good, but we must remember
that all home builders moved in the same way at the same time. For this to
be a robust solution, it would need to work on other markets. But even then,
there is a similarity in the price movement of all stocks on the same
exchange.
Table 3.19 shows the results of applying the same capping method to
the airline pairs, based on the momentum period of 7 and entry threshold
of ±40. As with the home builders, all the results were improved, although
of ±40. As with the home builders, all the results were improved, although
not quite as dramatically. Cumulative profits rose from an average of
$1,356 to $1,927, and the information ratio increased from an average of
0.335 to 0.572. Overall, the results confirm our previous tests, but it is not a
comprehensive study.
TABLE 3.19 Comparison of capping for airline pairs with momentum 7,
entry ±40.
The Problem with Zero-Value Returns
For those who are interested in the mathematics, one of the reasons that
the actual cost of buying and selling the pair exceeds our investment is that
the annualized standard deviation of the returns is too low. How can that
be? After all, it's just a simple statistical calculation. Of course, the number
is technically correct, but it includes all of the zero returns on those days
when we had no position. Therefore, the less often the pair trades, the
smaller the standard deviation. The actual risk on the days that a position
was held would be much higher, and we could see that if we had only used
the days on which returns were nonzero, that is, when we were holding a
position. But then, we would still have had the same returns, but the
volatility measure would give us a bigger number. Then our target volatility
would have required a larger investment. A larger investment with the
same returns would have resulted in a lower rate of return!
The idea of using only nonzero returns when annualizing the volatility is
important for infrequent trading. If we are using only 10 days to calculate
the annualized volatility and only one of those days has activity, then the
volatility is going to look unreasonably small. And if you followed 10 days of
being out of the market with 10 days of trading, then the volatility will be
increasing every day as the zero returns drop off. That creates an unstable
volatility measure. Instead, we really want to know, When we are in the
market, what is our risk? To know that, we should only calculate the
volatility on days with nonzero returns.
USING ETFS
Exchange-traded funds (ETFs) can be used in pairs trading as either one
of the legs or as a substitute for short sales; however, they are an index,
not an individual stock. As one of the legs, they offer additional
diversification, and as a substitute for short sales, they may make trading
easier. Short sales can be executed as easily as entering longs, and it will
not be affected if the government reinstates the uptick rule or even limits
short sales during periods of financial stress. The ETFs can always be
traded long or short in the same way as futures, without bias and without
additional expense.
Cross-Margining and Counterparty Risk
One very important advantage of using ETFs is cross-margining, a facility
also available for trading futures and options. Cross-margining is the
recognition that a pairs trade, or any spread between two related markets,
has less risk than being long or short both markets. Then the amount of
margin (good-faith deposit, not share value) required by the broker or
dealer is much lower than the face value of the ETFs because the risk is
offset. It is not clear whether there is cross-margining between a stock and
an ETF; however, these can be negotiable items if both trades are placed
at the same electronic communication network (ECN).
One note of caution: An ETF is guaranteed by the creditworthiness of
the issuer. During a time when banks have been bailed out or, in the case
of Lehman Brothers, collapsed, this level of counterparty risk may be
unacceptable to some investors. They should carefully assess this aspect
of risk before using ETFs. They are not guaranteed by the exchange
clearing house as are futures markets. Although the New York Stock
Exchange has a fiduciary responsibility to handle the transactions
correctly, they do not guarantee the firms listed on the exchange. And with
American depositary receipts (ADRs) listed, there is very little oversight as
to whether any of their financial disclosure is correct.
Composition of an ETF
A sector ETF is an average of a selection of stocks within that sector. An
ETF is usually capitalization weighted (the number of outstanding shares
times the price of a share), similar to the S&P or DJIA, or less often,
equally weighted (the same number of shares). Because it is an average,
the price of the ETF compared with a single stock will not be as volatile,
nor will it reach the stochastic extremes that are used for single stock
thresholds. Based on that, we would expect fewer trades with the same
profit per share as individual stocks, or the same number of trades with
smaller profits per share. But before we eliminate it because of purely
theoretical reasons, we need to see how the numbers look.
There are two viable ETF candidates for the home builders, and both
have reasonable liquidity:
1. XHB, SPDF S&P Homebuilders ETF, with data from February
6, 2006.
2. ITB, ISHARES DJ US Home Construction with data from May
5, 2006.
Figure 3.19 shows that these two ETFs track very closely.
FIGURE 3.19 The home builders ETFs, XHB and ITB, both track one
another closely.
Using an ETF as One Leg of a Pair
Considering the ETF as one leg of a pair, we can choose either XHB or
ITB, creating five additional pairs. The data for these ETFs begin in
February 2006 for XHB and May 2006 for ITB; therefore, we will create the
statistics for the full 10 pairs from February 2006 using the same
parameters, a momentum of 4, and an entry threshold of ±40. The results
are shown in Table 3.20 and are not as good as for the longer interval,
beginning January 2000, but they will give us a benchmark to compare the
use of an ETF.
TABLE 3.20 Home builder pairs from February 6, 2006.
The first case is to treat the ETF as another home builder stock, leg 2 in
our test. Table 3.21 shows the results. In both cases, there are only two
winning pairs and three losing ones. Surprisingly, they are not the same
pairs, even though the chart of the ETFs seemed nearly identical. There
are also many more trades than the pairs without ETFs, which was
unexpected, and needs to be explained.
TABLE 3.21 Home builders.
The stochastic indicator will take on values from 0 to 100 regardless of
volatility. It simply adjusts to the current volatility level and identifies the
extremes within its current framework. We expected the ETF to have less
volatility than a single stock because it is an average, and averages
benefit from diversification (an upward move offsetting a downward move).
To prove that, we applied the low-volatility filter at the arbitrary level of
100% and show the results for ITB in Table 3.22a and XHB in Table 3.22 b.
When we applied the low-volatility filter to the test beginning in January
2000, the filter level of 100% annualized volatility reduced trades from 137
to 20, showing a somewhat normal distribution. With the interval beginning
in 2006, trades were reduced less, indicating a flatter distribution.
Capping the Pairs Using ETFs
As further confirmation that capping benefits the performance, we applied
the same capping principle to the five pairs after the 100% low-volatility
filter was applied. Results are shown in Table 3.23. As with the earlier test,
TABLE 3.22 Using an ETF as leg 2 with a low-volatility filter of 100%
annualized.
TABLE 3.23 Using an ETF as leg 2 with a volatility filter and capping.
performance improved drastically, with the ratio jumping from 0.147 to
0.687 for ITB (Table 3.23 a) and from 0.334 to 0.535 for XHB (Table
3.23b). Overall, ITB seems to be a better performer, but it is still necessary
to filter trades in to create a profile that would be profitable after
transaction costs.
Using ETFs as a Substitute for Short Sales
A practical use for the ETFs is as a substitute for short sales, because
there are no restrictions on trading ETFs on the short side, and new
regulations are not likely to affect them. The ETF comes into play at the
time of execution; the signal to buy or sell the pair is still based on the two
stock legs.
In addition to executing the ETF instead of the short leg of the pair, we
need to consider whether the position size of the short leg should change.
The position size was intended to equalize the risk of both legs and was
calculated based on the average true range of each stock price over the
recent past. If we substitute an ETF with significantly different volatility, then
the long and short positions will not have offsetting risk. Then it seems
logical that we would recalculate the position size using the volatility of the
ETF.
In many cases, only the closing prices are available for the ETFs. If the
high, low, and close are available, then the volatility calculation would be
performed in exactly the same way as the underlying stocks, using the
average true range. However, if only the closing price is available, as it
was for our data, then the average true range becomes the average of the
close-to-close differences, which would be a much lower volatility value.
With only the closing prices, we went ahead and tested the use of both
ETFs as a substitute for short sales. The results, using the standard values
of a four-day momentum and ±40 entry threshold, are shown in Table 3.24.
TABLE 3.24 Comparison of ETF shorts using ETF volatility to determine
position size.
Although the chart shows that ITB and XHB are very similar, and the
correlation of their returns is .957, the effect of substituting them for the
short sales yields very different results. The ITB ETF performs better than
the benchmark case, and the XHB results are much worse. Profits per
share increase from 1.7 cents to 4.0 cents, and the ratio gains from 0.131
to 0.149. At the same time, using XHB turns those profits into net losses.
When we look at the individual pairs, we see that the ratio for KBH-TOL
jumped from –0.589 to +0.919 using ITB but was little changed with XHB,
and both ETFs performed very badly when used for LEN-HOV. In fact, ITB
has a very different performance overall.
We can conclude that using an ETF as a substitute for short sales can
work, but each ETF needs to be tested because just looking at the chart
doesn't tell us enough.
PORTFOLIO OF HOME BUILDER
PAIRS
The final step in creating performance expectations is to build a portfolio
from the results of the 10 pairs. This will show our anticipated returns and
the risk associated with those returns. We expect that the risk will be
reduced due to diversification, but we also know that these stocks are
highly correlated, and the reduction might be small.
Because the construction of a portfolio is important, we will go through
the process in six steps. The values for the pair LEN-TOL will be used as
an example. The first steps can also be followed in Table 3.25.
1. Create a series of daily profits or losses for each pair of
stocks. The net profit for the pairs is the sum of the gain or loss in
one stock (the number of shares held on day t times the change
in price from day t through day t + 1) plus the gain or loss in the
other stock. If you are using capped results, then the daily profits
and losses reflect the net return after capping the position size.
The capped results are shown in the second column (B) of Table
3.25.
TABLE 3.25 Construction of NAVs from daily profits and losses for
LEN-TOL.
2. Find the annualized volatility of the daily profits and losses in
(1). For this pair, first create a column with the daily differences in
the PL (column 3). Then find the standard deviation of those
differences, 18.03. To annualize, multiply that value by to get
286.21. Note that this annualized change seems lower than
expected because there were many days with no trading, giving
zero returns on those days.
3. Find the investment size needed to trade this series at your
target volatility. If the target is 12%, divide the annualized
standard deviation in (2) by 0.12. The capped series yields an
investment of $2,385. The capped series actually has lower
volatility and a lower investment than the noncapped returns. This
lower investment will translate into an increase in portfolio returns.
When using futures in the next chapter, we will be able to adjust
the leverage freely while keeping a close eye on risk.
4. Create the volatility-adjusted returns in column 4. Divide
each PL difference (column 3) by the investment size calculated
in step 3.
5. At this point, we have volatility-adjusted each pair to the target
volatility of 12% using the capped returns, so that each PL series
has an equal risk. We now create a NAV series (column 5) from
the capped PL for each of the pairs. Starting with the value 100,
we multiply the previous day's NAV by the value 1 + Returns for
the current day. For example, on January 13, the strategy had a
positive return of 0.00461, or about 46 basis points. Up to this
point, there were no trades. We get the new NAV value as
follows:
On the next day there was another gain of 0.00587. The new NAV
would be:
6. Repeat steps 1 through 5 for each pair of stocks.
When all the changes are processed, the final NAV for the pair LENTOL
is 343.56. Because this is a compounded rate of return, results will
sometimes increase faster or slower than the simple profit and loss
returns, as seen in Figure 3.20, which shows the NAVs of both the
noncapped and capped results.
FIGURE 3.20 LEN-TOL comparison of capped PL and capped NAV.
FIGURE 3.21 All 10 capped NAV streams from home builder pairs.
Putting the Portfolio Together
When the individual pairs results have been converted from PL to NAVs,
we get the NAV streams shown in Figure 3.21. All show good returns at
the same target volatility of 12%. The final step in creating a portfolio is to
begin with the daily returns for each pair, shown in column 4 of Table 3.25 .
Our portfolio will equally weight the returns for each pair because we
believe that all have the same chance of being profitable in the future. You
may know that modern portfolio theory states that a portfolio should be
maximized using the information ratio, the annualized returns divided by
the annualized risk. Then those pairs that have a better payoff (higher
return for the same risk) should be given more of the investment, which is
the same as giving them a larger weight or larger allocation.
Although modern portfolio theory was religiously accepted when it was
first proposed by Markowitz, the years have tempered enthusiasm for it.
No one has actually proved that it has predictive ability, only that the
optimized returns are better than any other combination. We shouldn't be
surprised that optimized returns are better.
We prefer to assume that we don't know which of the 10 pairs will give
the best returns next year. They all seem good, and the economy, as well
as individual corporate management, always seems to surprise us. The
best company this year can be out of business next year. Had we heavily
favored Enron in an energy portfolio, we would have been both
disappointed and broke.
This portfolio will equally weight all pairs. This approach is called
removing returns from the picture. It's simpler than portfolio optimization,
we can do it on a spreadsheet, and it assumes less. Because of that, we
also believe that the results, or expectations, are more realistic. The steps
are simple:
If you don't already have the daily returns for each series, you
can start with the NAVs and calculate the daily returns, r, as
For each day, average the returns of all 10 pairs. This is the
same as equally weighting the results. We'll call the average
daily return of the portfolio of 10 pairs R. Note that you will not
equally weight the pairs if the liquidity of one or more stocks is
restrictive.
Create the portfolio NAVs from the average returns using the
same formula that was given in step 5 when creating the
individual NAVs. The final portfolio NAV using capped returns is
327.77 and using noncapped is 173.36, both shown in Figure
3.22.
FIGURE 3.22 Final portfolio NAVs for home builders using
noncapped and capped returns.
Find the annualized rate of return
The ending capped NAV was 327.77, and the total number of
days was 2,530, then
The number of years is a decimal number, the result of dividing
the total number of trading days by the number of trading days in
a year (typically 252). The annualized return for this portfolio is
12.55%, without commission costs or other fees.
The information ratio, the final measurement of return for risk, is
A ratio of 2.34 is comfortably high and likely to remain above 1.5
even after costs are deducted. Any value over 1.0 means that
you are getting more return for each unit of risk. The information
ratio for a passive investment in the S&P index may be as low
as 0.4 over a long period of time, and even lower in recent years
that include the 2008 decline.
Th e final NAV stream for the portfolio of capped pairs is smoother than
the individual streams because of the unexpected diversification gained
from the different pairs and the final annualized volatility of only 5.35%,
down from 12%. Unless you choose one of the available leverage options,
such as financing part of the position with borrowed funds, you can't boost
the returns because the capped result is already using all of the
investment.
EXECUTION AND THE PART-TIME
TRADER
Success of a short-term trading program depends on the timely execution
of orders. Even though this program uses only the closing prices to
generate signals, it's not likely to be successful if calculations were done
after the market closed, then entered the next morning on the open. An
extreme price on the close is very likely to have corrected by the next
opening. It might work if executions were done in the aftermarket on the
same day, provided trading was done in small numbers. However, we
could be pleasantly surprised.
The most likely way of executing this program is to enter prices shortly
before the close, calculate the new positions, and enter those orders for
execution on the close or as soon as possible. As long as the pair
satisfied the entry threshold, you should have a good trade. If there are
differences between the price entered and the final closing price that would
have affected the position size, adjustments can be made after the close;
however, that may be unnecessary.
You may also want to choose a different time of day to trade, preferably
a few minutes after a key economic report, such as a Federal Reserve
Open Market Committee (FOMC) meeting. Statements of interest rate
changes and policy are released at 2:15 P.M. on the second day of the
meeting, usually a Tuesday. Capturing prices and trading somewhere
between 2:20 and 2:30 P.M. is likely to take advantage of price distortions
during a short but volatile reaction. Similarly, you might want to trade after
the official close on a day when the first chip manufacturer announces
quarterly earnings. There is a 15 minute window where you might find
greater price distortions between similar companies.
Pairs trading does not require that you enter a trade on the close. The
method holds up, or might even be better, if you can take advantage of
obvious shifts in prices. Exiting from a trade, however, is still best on the
close.
STOP-LOSSES
Many traders are concerned about unexpected price moves causing large
losses, and they often try to solve this problem using a stop-loss. Normally,
you would use a stop-loss for a trend trade or fundamental position, one
where you are net long or short. For a pairs trade, you have equal,
balanced positions, long and short, in related stocks. Any price shock will
affect both stocks and should cause offsetting profits and losses unless
that shock was related specifically to only one of the stocks in the pair.
Whether one stock of the pair moves more or less than the other is
arbitrary.
But what if the pair continues to post a loss and that loss gets larger?
How do you deal with controlling the maximum loss? It's not possible to
handle this with a stop-loss because both stock prices are moving, and the
loss is relative to the difference between the two. You could monitor the
profits or losses and close out the trade if the losses persisted. But the
nature of the method is that the stochastic indicator adjusts to higher or
lower prices and establishes a new norm. Then a smaller relative price
change will trigger an exit.
Using stops changes the performance profile of a system. Pairs trading
has a high probability of a profit, and there are many smaller profits and a
few larger losses. If you use a stop, then there will be more losing trades,
and in some cases you will have captured a loss when the trade would
have eventually produced a profit. The balance of the system will be
altered, and there is no assurance that the final result will be profitable.
TRADING INTRADAY
Our application has used closing price data; however, intraday price
changes can generate many more trades, and taken to an extreme, it is
similar to the high-frequency trading done by the big investment banks.
Those trades are entered and exited in milliseconds and costs are
negligible, but the principles are the same. In the previous section,
“Execution and the Part-Time Trader,” we discussed that trading after
economic or corporate announcements could be an advantage.
A compromise between daily and milliseconds is hourly data. The
strategy posts prices each hour and looks for the stochastic difference to
generate a trade. Of course, profits per trade would be smaller because
the holding period would also be shorter, so your costs would be the
limiting factor rather than the opportunities.
KEY POINTS TO REMEMBER
This chapter was as much about the process as about the
strategy. It was intended to be a step-by-step explanation of the
process needed to take an idea and create a trading strategy.
We began with what we believe to be a sound premise, that
pairs trading is based on the fundamental concept that two
stocks in the same sector, affected by the same
macrofundamentals, will perform similarly. Because of that, we
skipped the process of using in-sample and out-of-sample data,
which would be a requirement if we were exploring for a new
solution. Instead, we tested our method on one market and one
sector, then applied it to other markets and other sectors. It is a
weaker out-of-sample approach but we felt that it was sufficient.
We selected our set of markets by what seemed reasonable.
We picked those that were most liquid. We did not reject any
because their charts looked bad. We calculated the crosscorrelations
but did not find those values useful. Had one of the
stocks been negatively correlated, we would have rejected it.
We created the trading rules based on simple calculations that
showed the relative, not absolute, differences between the pairs.
We volatility-adjusted the position sizes to equalize the risk of
both legs. In doing that, we avoided a price move in one leg
overwhelming the results.
We ran tests on multiple pairs but looked at the average results
of all pairs, not at the individual profits and losses. When we
selected a parameter value, it was because it improved the net
performance of all pairs.
We confirmed our belief in the robustness of this strategy
because nearly all combinations of parameters were profitable
for the average results. We observed that the pattern in
performance was continuous when parameter values were
increased or decreased.
You don't need perfect performance to have a profitable trading
program. When we selected our final parameters, some of the
pairs showed losses. We did not remove those from the set
because we don't know what will happen in the future. If we could
justify removing the losing pairs, we could have justified
removing all but the most profitable pair.
We volatility-adjusted each of the pairs to the same target
volatility.
We tested a low-volatility filter, under the premise that small
price movement is the worst-case scenario for this strategy.
By creating a profit and loss series, we found the investment
size that was needed to trade each pair at our target volatility.
We then checked to see if the cost of trading the volatilityadjusted
positions on any day exceeded our investment size. It
did, in about a third of the days.
We needed to cap the size of the positions on days when they
would have exceeded our investment size. We scaled down the
position size to satisfy the cap and adjusted the daily returns by
that ratio. The result was that the capped performance
exceeded the original returns before capping.
Using the capped profits and losses, we found the new
investment size and created return series for each pair, each
with its own investment size. We averaged the daily returns and
found that the risk had dropped by about 40%. We created the
new portfolio NAVs from the aggregate investment size and the
average daily returns. Because of the nature of stock
investments, we were unable to leverage our returns to the
target volatility and needed to settle for about half of that, or 6%.
Chapter 4
Pairs Trading Using Futures
Although pairs trading clearly works, the returns for many stocks are small,
and the demands on good execution are high. In the previous chapter, we
looked at airlines and home builders and found that airline stocks did not
have enough volatility, and home builders are more active but give only
marginally good results. Using volatility and distortion filters will improve
results but at the cost of fewer trades. Capping provided an unexpected
gain while reducing the risk. The concept of trading pairs, however, is
fundamentally sound and can be considered robust because it shows
profits across a wide range of parameter values. What is needed is more
volatility or leverage.
It is possible to leverage returns in stocks by borrowing part of the
capital needed to trade. If interest rates were very low and trading returns
were high, then borrowing would be a profitable alternative. It is also
possible to use stock options rather than stocks. The companies that we
are trading are mostly large and liquid, so that options could be a viable
choice. In addition, options have no restrictions on going long or short. In
fact, by selling (writing) one leg, you receive the premium, offsetting the
cost of buying the other leg. Given the bullish or bearish bias in the market,
costs may be kept very small. It would be necessary to evaluate the
slippage, or bid-asked spread, combined with the net premium of the two
legs, to know the viability of using options. That is not our focus here.
FUTURES
Futures contracts offer a completely different approach, satisfying all
liquidity and leverage problems but providing far fewer choices in the
markets that can be traded. While there may be 30 to 50 different
companies within the energy complex, there are only six viable energy
futures markets: crude oil, natural gas, heating oil, and unleaded gasoline
trading at the New York Mercantile Exchange (NYMEX) in New York and
Brent and gas oil traded on the International Petroleum Exchange (IPE) in
London.
Another complication is that the trading hours are different in New York
and London. Even though crude oil has become a 24-hour market, the bulk
of liquidity occurs during the normal business hours in the country where
the commodity is being traded. Crude oil in New York is officially open
from 10:30 A.M. to 2:30 P.M.; in London, the pit session (open outcry if
there are still humans on the floor) is open from 10:02 A.M. to 7:30 P.M. On
the ICE (the all-electronic Intercontinental Exchange), trading is from 1:00
A.M. to 10:00 P.M. Given the five-hour time difference betwee n New York
and London during all but one week in the spring, we see that both the New
York and London markets are open during the entire time that New York
trades its pit session, from 3:30 P.M. to 7:30 P.M., and they both close at
the same time.
Our approach has been to trade on the close, which also assumes that
prices posted on the close are realistic approximations of the price of two
markets at the same time. Even then, no one ever gets a fill at the
settlement price. If you're a buyer on the close, expect to get a price above
the settlement, and if you're a seller, below the settlement. A bid-asked
spread exists no matter what time of day you're trading and no matter how
liquid the market.
In futures, the settlement price is a volume-weighted average price of all
trading during the last 30 seconds of the session. This is similar to the
close of the stock markets. Because of that, getting the closing price for
your execution is not realistic, and on volatile days, the range of the last 30
seconds can be wide. It may be safer to trade a few minutes before the
close to have better control of your fill price. Unfortunately, because this
trade may have one leg in New York and one leg in London, it's not
possible to enter the order as a spread, which guarantees a minimum
differential between the two prices. For pairs on the same exchange,
spread orders are the best way to go.
Technically, the popularity of 24-hour markets and extended pit sessions
makes it possible to trade both legs of a spread at the same time, at
almost any time, albeit with different amounts of liquidity. But it is more
important to know that the prices used to decide the trade actually
occurred at the same time. If the two markets that make up the pair are not
actively trading, the screen price will not be the price you would get when
you execute the trade. For example, you think there is an opportunity to
arbitrage gold because a COMEX (Commodity Exchange) deferred
contract is trading at $1,150 and London forward of a comparable delivery
is showing a print of $1,154. The cost of delivery is $2. But London gold
hasn't traded for two minutes. If you were to look at the bid-asked, you
might see $1,149.5 and $1,150.5, showing that the next trade would bring
prices back together, eliminating any arbitrage possibility.
Even with these complications, the closing price is the most realistic
assumption that both markets have traded at the same time. The close
tends to have very high liquidity. Still, when you buy one leg, you often get a
price in the upper half of the closing range, and as a seller, you get the
lower half. It's necessary to be sure you wait for a spread difference large
enough to absorb a poor fill and still net a profit.
For the equity index markets, which we will apply in these examples, only
the U.S. and European markets will be used. In April 2005, EUREX
changed its trading hours to remain open until the close of the U.S.
sessions. The German DAX, EuroStoxx, French CAC, and other European
index markets (although not the London FTSE) all close at 10 P.M. in
Germany, or 4 P.M. in New York, except for one week in the spring when
the United States adjusts to daylight savings time earlier than Europe or
Great Britain. This allows us to assume that the closing prices are close
enough and base our trading signals on the close.
Different Holidays
There are many days in which either the U.S. or European markets are not
open due to holidays. Over the years, many countries have aligned their
holidays so that the markets are open and closed at the same time;
however, London does not close when the U.S. celebrates Independence
Day, July 4, even if there is little trading. It's the principle.
To account for these differences, and the errors it would cause if the
strategy didn't recognize that one market was closed and the other open,
we have adopted the rule:
If either market posts no price change, we cannot enter or exit a
trade.
There will be days when the market actually closes unchanged, and the
system will not change its position. These differences seem small
compared with entering or exiting with a large profit (or loss) because one
market traded and the other did not. Those traders who are more
ambitious can keep an accurate calendar of market holidays, which are
available on each of the exchange web sites.
Trading Habits in Different Countries
Although markets now stay open at all hours to accommodate traders,
most activity is still concentrated during local business hours. That is to our
advantage. The results will show that the best performance is when we
trade a U.S. against a European market. There are two primary reasons.
While the fundamentals of the economy are different, globalization
causes traders to push similar markets in the same direction. When the
release of a U.S. economic report causes the U.S. stock market to jump
higher, European index markets tend to follow before deciding to what
extent that report actually affects them.
The second reason is that traders in Germany just don't want to stay up
until 10 P.M. to trade the U.S. close. Naturally, professional hedge funds
hire traders to do just that—to keep the same hours as U.S. markets. But
that's not enough to make the volume high.
Check the Data Carefully
Many futures markets have day sessions (once called the pit session,
before most of the pits became extinct), night sessions, and overnight
sessions. For convenience, these will be called open outcry and electronic
sessions.
For a pit session, or open outcry session, the trading day starts at the
beginning of business hours for the country in which the futures market is
trading. In the United States, stocks and stock index markets open their pit
sessions at 9:30 A.M. New York time. The stock market closes at 4 P.M.,
but futures close at 4:15. The extra 15 minutes allows reaction to some
earnings reports released just after the close of the NYSE. The close of the
pit session is also the price used for marked-to-market accounting, the
settling of all profits and losses for the day.
After a pause of from 15 minutes to one hour, the electronic session
starts. For some markets, there is side-by-side trading. For example, there
is an S&P pit session trading a big contract worth $250 per big point
change, and an electronic e-mini contract with a $50 per big point change.
The e-mini contract trades 24 hours and has most of the volume.
“Big point” or “handle” is the insiders’ way of saying that the price to the
left of the decimal point has changed. In the days when the pit session was
active, traders used hand signals to indicate the price at which they wanted
to buy or sell. Those signals showed only the decimal place, not the handle.
Even today in crude oil, trading is so active that prices could stay between,
for example, $71.00 and $72.00 for hours, so that only the cents are
needed to show your bid or asked price.
When you look at combined session data, which are very common now,
you are seeing the trading from both the pit and electronic sessions. For
the U.S. markets, the new trading day starts after the close of the pit
session when the electronic session opens (for the S&P) at 6 P.M. the
same evening. Both the pit and electronic sessions close at 4:15 P.M. the
next day.
For Europe, the electronic session becomes an extension of the current
day. But even in Europe, the official settlement price occurs between 2:30
P.M. and 4:15 P.M. local time, essentially tied to when the banks
traditionally closed for the day and posted all debits and credits.
It is important to know that, in Europe, the DAX day session closes at 5
P.M., electronic at 10 P.M., and some data series have the high and low
until 10 P.M. but the official settlement at 5 P.M. Whoops! That doesn't
work for your trading system because the high or low could have occurred
after the 5 P.M. close, and you would be using data that did not exist at 5
P.M. You'll need to be sure that you have a data series that has the last
price instead of the settlement.
Markets Close at Different Times
For some of the examples in this chapter, the futures markets used in a
pair may not close at exactly the same time. These are mainly in the
section that looks at inflation-related markets, gold, crude oil, and the
EURUSD. The biggest impact on the results is that there may be some
additional trades due to price moves that occur after one market is closed.
However, when we compared the periods when the S&P and EuroStoxx
did not close at exactly the same time with the later period when they did,
we could not see a significant difference in the number of trades. Of
course, when actually trading these pairs, entries and exits to both legs
must be done simultaneously, when both markets are trading.
MECHANICS OF A PAIRS TRADE IN
FUTURES
The mechanics of a futures trade are slightly different from the trades using
stocks that we covered in the previous chapter. The two exceptional
advantages are:
1. There is no distinction between entering a long trade and a
short sale (simply called a “short” in futures). When you place an
order to buy, you don't tell the broker that you're setting a new
position or covering a previous short. If you are previously long 10
contracts and you place an order to sell 10, you end up flat. If you
are long 5 contracts and sell 10, you end up short 5. There are no
uptick rules and no likelihood that shorts would be restricted in
any way. You don't need to borrow stock to sell short; it's a normal
process when you trade futures. Selling short in futures simply
means that you believe prices will go down. The person who
takes the other side of that trade expects prices to go up. You
can both be right if your time frames are different; prices could go
down in the short term, then up in the long term.
2. You can leverage the trades without borrowing funds. In fact,
you earn interest on most of the money on deposit in your
account. That can offset the commission costs. In trading futures,
you only need to put up margin, but this is not the same as
margin for stocks. It is simply a good faith deposit. For most
futures trades, that deposit amounts to about 10% of the contract
value. If you are a commercial trader—that is, if you are trading
gold and your business is jewelry—then your margin might be as
low as 5%. For example, if gold is trading at $1,100/ounce and
the contract is 100 ounces, then one contract is worth $110,000.
The typical margin would be about $10,000, but the exact number
can be found by going to the COMEX or Chicago Mercantile
Exchange (CME) web site or checking with your broker.
Putting up $10,000 to trade a gold contract, with gold at $1,100 an
ounce, is the same as buying assets of $110,000 at a leverage of 11:1. In
reality, the leverage is lower because the brokerage firm will require more
in the event your trade goes the wrong way. In futures, you are required to
restore margin to the full amount ($10,000 in our example) once your
balance falls below 75% of the initial margin. To avoid continuous
problems, a broker may want you to deposit $20,000 or $30,000 just to
trade one contract. That means they won't have to chase clients who lose
all their investment and more. In futures, you are responsible for your
losses, even if they exceed the amount on deposit in your account. A
typical investment manager will keep leverage to 4:1. Then, for one gold
contract, they will have $40,000 on deposit, earning either money market
interest or 3-month T-bill rates on up to 90% of the balance.
Example of Trading Signals for Futures
As an example of a pairs trade in futures, we use a heating oil–natural gas
pair. Table 4.1 shows two trades, both profitable, but with large equity
swings. In this example we use a 14-day calculation period and enter a
new trade when the momentum difference exceeds ±50 and an exit when
the momentum falls to 10 for shorts and rises to –10 for longs.
TABLE 4.1 Two sample trades for the pair natural gas and heating oil.

In the first trade, lasting only two days, the momentum difference on
6/9/2009 is –58.37, below the –50 entry threshold. This is the difference
between the natural gas momentum of 29.55 and the heating oil
momentum of 87.93, indicating that natural gas was moderately oversold
while heating oil was somewhat overbought, as given by the 14-day
calculation period. The entry prices are the closing prices for that day,
2.359 and 15.517. Remember that these are back-adjusted futures, so
these prices are not the actual prices that occurred on that day.
On the following day, the natural gas momentum rises slightly, and the
heating oil momentum drops considerably, resulting in a net momentum
difference of –0.53. An exit is triggered because the momentum difference
is above the threshold of –10. Most of the profit is due to heating oil, for a
net gain of $32,040.
The position size for this trade was determined from the volatility
calculation, which is the 14-day average true range. We use the same
period as the stochastic calculation for consistency and in order not to
introduce an additional parameter. At the time of the entry signal, June 9,
2006, natural gas had a average daily dollar range of $2,837 and heating
oil a range of $2,424. With a lower volatility, heating oil will get more
contracts than natural gas, in this case –12 to 10.
The second trade on June 14, 2006, is much more volatile. Natural gas
is now overbought with a stochastic of 82.80, and heating oil is oversold at
14.52. The volatility is nearly the same as three days prior, so we buy 10
natural and sell 12 heat. However, on the first day, natural gas jumps
3.85% while heat only gains 0.02%, for a net loss of $62,641. After that,
the two markets work their way back in the right direction for a net gain on
the trade of $43,919 when the momentum difference goes negative. This
is a trade that shows how difficult it is to use a stop-loss order, which would
have exited the trade at the worst time, locking in the large loss.
Remember that the natural profile of performance is to have a few large
losses and more smaller profits.
INFLATION SCARES
The first decade of the 21st century included the end of the tech bubble that
sent NASDAQ to nearly 5000, the subsequent drop of 75%, the attack of
September 11, 2001, real estate hyperinflation leading to the subprime
collapse, a run in crude oil to $150/barrel and related panic over
impending inflation, a worldwide government takeover of financial
institutions, record unemployment, record corporate bonuses, and a
smooth rally in the equity markets in 2009 in anticipation of more stable
times to come. We live in interesting times.
News of these events can be confusing. Too many of us watch the
financial news programs, which, because of the need to make everything
sound urgent, tend to make minor events into something newsworthy and
of great importance to the viewers. Without this high-profile coverage,
most market fluctuations would most likely be little blips of noise.
The year with the most extreme price moves was 2008. In Figure 4.1, we
can compare the bull (and bear) markets in oil with other key commodities.
From late 2007, there is a clear upturn in gold, wheat, and crude oil, with a
smooth decline in the Dollar Index. Although the rally in prices is somewhat
out of phase, the decline that began after crude peaked was remarkably
uniform. Was it a reaction to a false alarm in inflation? Not likely. Again, we
would argue that it was mostly caused by investors pulling money out of
every market at the same time. Commodity index funds had gained in
popularity during the bull market in wheat, and everyone had been
concerned that the price of bread was going to double or triple. With wheat
dropping, followed by a collapse in the crude market, the dollar gaining
strength, and gold falling from its highs of $1,000/ounce, investors saw
their profits disappearing. Once the liquidation started, it became
contagious.
FIGURE 4.1 Inflation-related commodities: the dollar index, gold, crude oil,
copper, and wheat. The relationships are strongest when the economy is
under stress.
In this chapter, we'll look at the periods where these markets all seem to
have moved together and see if there were profits to be made—at a
reasonable risk. But first we'll focus on the energy markets, which have
gained tremendous interest during the past two years.
Setting Up the Trade
For pairs trading using stocks, we started with a basic unit size of 100
shares for leg 1, the first stock of the pair. The size of the second leg was
larger or smaller, depending on its volatility, in order to make the risk of
both legs equal. For futures, the starting size will be 10 contracts for the
first leg, and the second will then be adjusted in the same way as with
stocks. Using 10 contracts does not give us the accuracy of 100 for sizing
the second leg, but 10 contracts of futures can be a large investment and is
enough to show the effect of adjusting position size to volatility.
Margin and Leverage
Consider that each contract of crude oil is 1,000 barrels (bbl), currently
selling at about $75/bbl. The contract size is then $75,000, the minimum
trading unit. Of course, you don't need to invest $75,000 to buy one
contract of crude; you only need to put up a margin deposit of about
$7,500, or 10% of the contract value.
If you buy a contract and the price of crude goes up $1, you gain $1,000.
Your deposit is $7,500, giving you a return of 13.3%. That can easily
happen in one day. On the other hand, if the price drops by $1 you lose
13.3%. If the price rises by $10/bbl to $85 (not out of the question), you
have earned 133%. But if it drops by $10 (equally possible), you have lost
your $7,500, plus you must pay the broker the remaining $2,500 within 24
hours. If you want to continue to trade you must deposit more money.
In reality, it doesn't quite happen that way. Based on the volatility of the
market, your deposit should be high enough to cover most normal moves,
so doubling or losing all your money in one day should not happen. On the
other hand, you may be required to deposit $25,000 and only trade one
crude contract. That protects the broker from the possibility of uncovered
losses. If you start to lose so much that your deposit is eroding, the broker
will ask you to restore your account to its original value or will liquidate your
positions for you. There is no such thing as losing more than you have and
then borrowing to cover your losses—only the big banks can do that.
TRADING ENERGY PAIRS
For simplicity, we will trade energy pairs using only the four primary U.S.
energy markets, crude oil (symbol CL, also known as WTI for West Texas
Intermediate), its products, heating oil (HO) and reformulated blendstock
for oxygenate blending (RBOB or RB), gasoline, and natural gas (NG). The
gasoline contract, which used to be called unleaded gas changes often
because of environmental regulations, so it's best to keep watching the
volume for any noticeable, permanent declines. Low volume will tell you
that there is another, more active contract.
As mentioned before, the crude contract is 1,000 barrels, heating oil is
42,000 gallons, unleaded gas is 42,000 gallons, and natural gas is 10,000
million British thermal units (Btus). The contracts are sized this way
because of commercial needs. An oil refiner typically buys three contracts
of crude and produces two contracts of gasoline and one of distillate
(heating oil). The crack spread, which gets favorable margin from the
exchange, is a spread that buys crude and sells RBOB and heating oil in
the ratio 3:2:1, although this is not exact. If producing margins are too low,
the refiner has the option of doing a reverse crack, in which it sells crude
and buys the products. In our trading, we will only spread pairs and decide
the relative position sizes using volatility. It is generally unproductive to
trade the crack and try to compete with commercials at their own game.
If the price of crude oil moves from $75 to $76, the profit or loss from
trading each contract is $1,000. If heating oil moves from $2.25/gallon to
$2.26/gallon, the profit or loss is $420, and the same for unleaded gas. If
natural gas rises from $6.500 mmBtu to $6.600 mmBtu, the gain or loss is
$1,000. Therefore, the minimum move (smallest decimal move) for crude
is worth $10, for heating oil and unleaded gas $4.20, and for natural gas
$10.
Trading Hours
For us to be able to test these pairs correctly, the data must be posted at
the same time. In the energy markets, that is no problem because all four
futures markets have a pit session that opens at 9:00 A.M. and closes at
2:30 P.M., Eastern time. It is unclear whether the pit session refers to open
outcry trading or if it is just the primary electronic session. If it is not all
electronic, it will be soon. There is also an electronic session for all
markets that opens at 6:00 P.M. (18:00) and closes the next day at 5:15
P.M. (17:15).
The London Intercontinental Exchange (ICE) also trades similar
products: Brent crude oil, a close proxy to our WTI, and gas oil (similar to
our heating oil). The ICE is only electronic, with hours from 20:00 to 18:00
the following day (22 continuous hours), Eastern time. Although the closing
prices are only 45 minutes later than the U.S. electronic counterpart, it
would be necessary to capture prices at exactly the same time in the U.S.
and London to have accurate data to trade pairs with one leg on each side
of the pond.
As we will see from looking at the equity index and interest rate market
pairs that span the U.S. and Europe, there is greater opportunity trading
markets that respond to the same fundamentals but are applied to different
economies. It is likely that energy pairs that have one U.S. leg and one
London leg will be more profitable than the combinations of U.S. markets
tested here, but that will be an opportunity that readers must pursue on
their own. There is no viable arbitrage between the U.S. and European
energy markets, but global macro events seem to keep both markets
moving in the same way.
More Fundamental Background
There are some fundamentals that we should discuss ahead of seeing
results, as a way of setting expectations. It was already mentioned that
heating oil and natural gas have overlapping markets, home heating, but
most users cannot change from one to another because of equipment.
Some commercial plants have that ability to use both sources, but it is not
common. Heating oil is also diesel fuel, used for trucks and an increasing
number of cars, especially in Europe. However, there is no practical
arbitrage for heating oil. That is, the price of heating oil in Europe, called
gas oil, would need to be much higher than the price in the U.S. to make
loading and shipping from the U.S. to Europe, or the other direction, a
profitable transaction.
Heating oil and gasoline are the refined products of crude oil and are
produced in different percentages as the seasons change in North
America. The production of heating oil is increased beginning in the early
summer to build inventories, and gasoline production is increased in April
in anticipation of the driving season, which officially starts on Memorial Day
(the end of May) in the U.S. Prices of gasoline tend to increase during the
high-demand summer season, and heating oil can increase at the
beginning of winter, or anytime between December and March, in
expectation of any sustained cold spell that would affect demand.
Crude oil does not have any clear seasonal pattern, being the netting of
the products, gasoline and heating oil, which are both seasonal. It does
make extreme moves due to geopolitical risk, such as attacks on the
pipelines in Iraq or Nigeria or labor strikes in Venezuela. Crude prices are
also manipulated by OPEC, which sets production limits for its
participating members. This has had mixed success over the years, but
they keep trying. In the final analysis, any country in need of money will try to
sell more oil.
Crude oil also follows the change in the U.S. dollar because it is quoted
in dollars worldwide. For example, if the dollar declines against the euro
from 1.35 to 1.40, about 3.7%, we should see a similar rise in the price of
crude oil, everything else being equal. Oil maintains what we would call a
global value. That holds true for commodities as well. In Figure 4.2, the
vertical price scales have been extended to fill the chart, giving both crude
and the EURUSD the same relative volatility and showing remarkable
similarity. Although crude moved much further measured as a percentage,
the overlapping patterns show an undeniable relationship since March
2007. Oddly enough, it appears that the EURUSD started up in the first
quarter of 2007 before it was joined by crude. This looks like an
opportunity, but the daily correlation is only .33, measured beginning in
2007.
FIGURE 4.2 Crude oil and the EURUSD show a remarkable correlation
from 2007.
Despite the different fundamentals, energy prices move together. When
crude oil spikes up during the winter, heating oil is the primary focus, but
gasoline prices must be dragged higher as well. In the spring and early
summer, it is the opposite, with gasoline leading the way. You can't expect
a big move in any of the energy markets without all the others showing
some proportional reaction. It's the lead and lag in these moves that
provides trading opportunities.
REVISITING MOMENTUM WITH
ENERGY MARKETS
Energy markets have been the focus of rising costs for the past two years,
topping with crude oil at $150/bbl and taking the products, gasoline and
heating oil, along with it. Natural gas moved higher then lower, along with
crude, as did all sources of energy (even firewood), although very few
users are able to use heating oil and natural gas interchangeably. The
equipment needed to use one or the other is not readily interchangeable.
Figure 4.3 shows a chart of crude oil, heating oil, and natural gas from
1990 through January 2010. Heating oil tracks crude because it is derived
from crude, and natural gas starts to shadow the movements of crude in
1996, but only when the moves are larger.
FIGURE 4.3 Energy prices, 1990–January 2010, log scale. There is a
similarity in natural gas, but there are also large differences.
Opportunity and Risk
The interesting part about natural gas and heating oil is that the traders
create strong correlations during periods of stress. During a crisis, it is
always money that moves the market, not common sense. Although the big
picture of natural gas and heating oil price moves, Figure 4.3 shows a
general, smooth downtrend of natural gas prices, compared with a general
rise in heating oil prices into 2008; during the times when crude price
moved up faster than normal, natural gas followed. The most extreme
example was the peak of 2008 shown in Figure 4.4.
FIGURE 4.4 NYMEX energy prices, August 31, 2007–October 31, 2008.
Natural gas tracks crude oil and heating oil during times of stress. At the
peak of crude oil prices, in mid-2008, natural gas tracked crude oil as
though it were a product.
During the 14 months that included the peak crude oil price on July 14,
2008, natural gas moved in step with crude oil and especially heating oil.
Once prices came back down in late 2008, the similarity of price
movement disappeared. Figure 4.5 shows the prices of heating oil and
natural gas from March 2009 through the end of 2009. You can find short
bursts of similarity in the prices, but overall the picture is one of heating oil
rising and natural gas falling. These differences can offer both opportunity
and risk.
FIGURE 4.5 Heating oil and natural gas, from March 2009 through
January 2010, following the peak in crude oil. Arbitrage would have
provided more risk than reward.
The correlations during the three periods may give a more exact picture.
Table 4.2 shows the three intervals:
1. All data from 1990 through 2009.
2. Peak crude oil price move, September 2007 through October
2008.
3. After-the-peak price moves, March 2008 through December
2009.
In the top panel of Table 4.2 , we see the normal, long-term relationship
of the three markets. Unleaded gas is omitted because it has a very
similar relationship to both crude and natural gas, as heating oil. The left
side of the table used the price differences to find the correlations, and the
right side used the percentage changes. Normally we would want to use
the percentage changes, but most futures long-term data is continuously
back-adjusted from individual futures contracts. In the worst cases, where
there is a significant price gap between the contract that is expiring and
the next contract to be used, the aggregate back adjusting can cause the
oldest prices to become negative, or near zero. For those markets,
percentages don't work. For commodity prices such as energy and metals,
cash prices offer a good alternative; however, using differences will give
similar results if you stay aware of the data problems.
TABLE 4.2 Cross-correlations of crude oil, heating oil, and natural gas
during the three intervals: all data from 1990 through 2009 (top panel); the
peak crude period, September 2007 through October 2008 (center panel);
and the after-the-peak period, March 2009 through December 2009
(bottom panel).
Heating oil and unleaded gas are always highly correlated to crude
prices, which is to be expected because they are both products of crude.
During the three periods shown in Table 4.2 , the correlation of heat to
crude stays over .90. It is not higher due to the seasonality of the products.
During the spring and summer months, the product prices are driven by
unleaded gasoline, and heating oil becomes a secondary market, causing
a less direct relationship.
A long-term correlation of 0.351 for crude and natural gas shows some
correlation, but it is not clear whether they would be profitable for pairs
trading; the risk may be too high. However, during the peak period for
crude prices, the correlation with natural gas jumped to 0.557 for crude
and 0.536 for heating oil, making it a likely candidate. After the peak, those
correlations dropped to below the long-term values, so this opportunity
would have increased in risk.
In this chapter, we will look at pairs trading in futures markets that have a
long-term history of being fundamentally related, as well as more limited,
shorter-term opportunities. Sometimes the best trades are those that
spring from special situations.
Trading Energy Pairs
We've looked at the changing correlations in the most active energy
futures, and now it's time to see if they can be traded profitably as pairs.
The four futures contracts are crude (CL), heating oil (HO), unleaded
gasoline (RB), and natural gas (NG). Both Brent and gas oil, traded on the
IPE or ICE, are also candidates but won't be considered here. The data
will be the past 10 years, beginning January 2000.
We can first set our expectations by looking at the correlations of the six
pairs, shown in Table 4.3. It is immediately clear that the pairs made up of
crude and its products have a very high correlation, and those using natural
gas are much lower. Because this period included the very volatile run-up
in crude to $150, the current correlations with natural gas are toward the
high part of the range seen in Table 4.2 . The two groups provide very
different expectations. The high correlations make it certain that
divergences in the momentum will produce a trade that quickly corrects,
but the absolute price differences may be too small to be profitable after
we subtract our cost of $25 per contract for each round-turn. Because of
the lower correlations, natural gas pairs are likely to be more profitable but
with much higher risk.
TABLE 4.3 Correlations of pairs, 10 years beginning 2000.
Leg 1 Leg 2 Corr
Crude Unleaded 0.837
Crude Heating 0.883
Unleaded Heating 0.812
Crude Natural gas 0.391
Unleaded Natural gas 0.368
Natural gas Heating 0.411
Average Crude & products 0.844
Average Natural gas 0.390
The rules for trading will be exactly the same as in Chapter 3, except that
we charge a round-turn cost of $25 per contract. We calculate the
stochastic momentum values of the two futures markets separately over
the same time period, subtract the two values, and test that difference
against an entry threshold. When we tested stocks using calculation
ranges from 14 to 4, we found that the smaller momentum periods
emphasized market noise, which is to our advantage, and increased the
number of trades. The entry threshold was from ±60 to ±40, but the lower
value of ±40 generated the most trades. The entry thresholds also affect
the size of the individual trade profits (and risk), which is the negative part
of the trade-off. Getting enough profits per trade was the biggest problem.
TABLE 4.4 Results of energy pairs varying the calculation period and entry
threshold. The stochastic momentum calculation period is on the left and
the entry threshold along the top axis.
I n Table 4.4 , the results of these tests are shown for all six pairs,
separated into those without natural gas (part a) and those with natural gas
(part b). The test period was January 2000 through March 2010. It is
immediately evident that the pairs made up of crude and its products all fail
to generate profits after costs. On the other hand, the natural gas pairs
were all successful, net of costs, for all combinations of calculation periods
and entry thresholds except the fastest, 4 days. We can understand that the
shortest calculation periods result in the fastest trades and the smallest
returns per trade. In this case, 4 days was too fast.
The natural gas pairs show a consistent pattern of improvement as
values move from the bottom right to the top left, which is also from faster
to slower, peaking at a calculation period of 10 days. Keeping it in
perspective, the range of periods, from 4 to 14, is considered a fast range
and not suitable for trend following.
It is often the case that the best ratio is among the fastest trading
models, and we find that the profits per contract are marginally large
enough to offset costs. That doesn't seem to be the situation here, but then
the successful pairs are those with natural gas, and the correlations are
fairly low. We can expect these markets to move apart often but come
back together because the energy complex has underlying similarities and
will react to much of the market news in the same way.
It's likely that some traders will choose a different combination of
parameters. They might try to maximize the number of trades or the profits
per contract. They may want the combination that is out of the market most
often, as a way of avoiding price shocks. And we didn't test combinations
of exit thresholds, where a short trade is entered at a momentum
difference of 60 and exited at 10 rather than 0. That would increase the
number of trades, increase the percentage of profitable trades, but
decrease the size of the per contract returns. There is no best choice, only
trade-offs and trader preference. Those options are left to the reader.
TABLE 4.5 Individual energy pairs’ performance using momentum period
10, entry threshold ±60, from January 2000.
In this example, the best choice will be the parameters that produced the
highest ratio, a calculation period of 10 and an entry threshold of ±60.
Table 4.5 shows some of the statistics for that choice. There are only 10
trades per year, but the profits per contract are sufficiently large to give us
confidence that we can absorb any surprising slippage. The reasonably
equal distribution of profits per contract between leg 1 and leg 2 is also
good, showing that both markets are moving. Annualized returns averaged
only 6.7% but will be higher when this is mixed in a portfolio and
diversification reduces the risk. These values are all based on an
annualized volatility (standard deviation) of 12%, as are all results shown in
this book.
For completeness, we also show the results of the crude-product pairs in
Table 4.6 . First, the number of trades is very small because the
correlations are high. It is rare that the two closely related markets diverge
enough to generate a trading signal. The only pair that netted a profit was
unleaded–heating oil, which have opposite seasonality and are most likely
to move apart. The ratio of 0.129 shows that the performance was very
erratic, and you would need to take nearly 8 times the risk for each unit of
reward. That's not an attractive profile.
TABLE 4.6 Results of crude-product pairs with a period of 10 and entry
threshold of ±60.
A MINIPORTFOLIO OF NATURAL GAS
PAIRS
Selecting the three natural gas pairs, we can combine the profit and loss
streams into a portfolio to see how much diversification we gain. This will
be the same process that we use for any group of pairs in the same sector.
We can later combine multiple sectors for further diversification. As we will
see with futures, we have the ability to choose our level of risk and vary our
leverage. It is one of the great advantages of trading futures.
The process begins with either the three streams of daily profits and
losses or the cumulative profits shown in Figure 4.6. You start with the
cumulative profits, then simply subtract each day's value from the previous
day to get the change in profits. As you can see in the chart, heating oil
appears to be more volatile than either crude or unleaded gas. The
process of adjusting to a target volatility will equalize the volatility of the
returns of each of the three pairs.
FIGURE 4.6 Cumulative profit and loss streams for the three natural gas
pairs, from 2000.
Step 1: Calculation of the Daily Profit or Loss
Each day it is necessary to calculate the daily profit or loss, less the roundturn
commission when the trade is closed out. Table 4.7 shows the data
needed to calculate the profits and losses, along with the momentum
difference to confirm that an entry or exit has occurred.
TABLE 4.7 Calculating the daily profits and losses for the crude−natural
gas pair.

The first trade is entered at the close on February 9, 2000, selling 10
contracts of crude at 63.11 and buying 7 natural gas at 20.317 based on
current volatility. Note that these prices are back-adjusted futures but work
accurately for these examples. On the next day, February 10, 2000, the
price of crude rises by $0.66, and natural gas also rises by $0.052. The
conversion factor for crude is $1,000 for a 1.00 move and $10,000 for a
1.00 move in natural gas, then 10 contracts of crude generate a loss of 10
× $0.66 × $1,000 = $6,600, and 7 contracts of natural gas generate a gain
of 7 × $0.052 × $10,000 = $3,640. That gives a net loss for the day, as well
as a cumulative loss, of $2,960.
On the next day, February 11, 2000, crude gains $0.01 and natural gas
drops $0.022, both losses for the pairs trade, netting a daily loss of $1,640
and a cumulative loss of $4,600. The calculations continue in the same
way, but with prices going in a favorable direction until the trade is closed
out on February 17, 2000. On that day, the daily profit or loss is reduced by
an additional $25 for each contract, or $250 for crude and $175 for natural
gas, giving the final trade a profit of $765.
There are no trades for the next three days; therefore, the daily profit/loss
column shows zeros.
The next trade is entered on February 23, 2000, and is also short crude
and long natural gas. This time, the volatility of natural gas has dropped,
and the position sizes are equal. If we follow the same calculations, we
show a large gain on the final day of the trade, February 28, 2000, resulting
in a cumulative profit.
The Net PL column, second from the right, will be used to continue the
portfolio construction.
Step 2: Align the Profit/Loss Streams
There are three daily profit/loss streams that must be aligned by date. For
markets that all trade on the same exchange in the same country, this is
not usually a problem. Pasting them into Excel should be all that's
necessary. However, dealing with pairs that have one leg in the U.S. and
one leg in Europe requires an additional step.
When the data are aligned by date and one market is closed, it is
necessary to enter a zero in the cell if that cell represents returns, or copy
down the previous cell if the stream is the cumulative profits/losses.
Step 3: Target Volatility and Investment Size
To generate the daily returns, we need to decide on an investment size
and a target volatility. For example, we will invest $100,000 but only want a
2.5% chance of losing 24% of the investment. We choose 2.5% because it
represents one side of a 2 standard deviation distribution. Because it is 2
standard deviations and the annualized volatility is based on 1 standard
deviation, we know that a target volatility of 12% will satisfy our needs.
If we know what our target volatility should be, then we can arrive at
these results with a few steps. We use 12% annualized volatility as the
industry standard for risk.
To find the investment size needed to have 12% volatility,
Find the standard deviation of the profits and losses for the
entire performance period.
Multiply that value by the square root of 252 to get the
annualized volatility in dollars.
Divide the annualized volatility by the target volatility (0.12) to get
the investment size for this market (the market investment).
Repeat the process for each market.
Add the market investments to get the portfolio investment.
Scale all values to your actual investment size.
Alt ernatively, if you know your investment size, you can adjust all the
returns to your target volatility:
Convert cumulative profits to daily profits and losses for each
series by subtracting the value on day t – 1 from the value on
day t.
Calculate the returns, rt, by dividing the daily profits and losses
by the investment.
Find the standard deviation of the returns for the entire series.
Multiply that value by the square root of 252 to get the
annualized volatility in dollars.
Divide the target volatility (12%) by the annualized volatility to
get the volatility adjustment factor, VAF. Note that we must
always lag the use of VAF by one day to replicate trading.
Calculate NAVs starting at 100, with each subsequent
All NAV series are now adjusted to 12% volatility. You can now
combine them into a portfolio using your allocation percentages.
Ta ble 4.8 shows the steps using the first set of rules. The three daily
profit streams are in the columns under the heading “Daily Profits/Losses.”
They begin on January 1, 2000. Below those columns are three additional
values marked “Annualized volatility,” calculated as shown in the previous
steps. The market investments based on the target volatility of 0.12 are
shown below that. The sum of the three market investments is $4,331,319,
but remember that this is based on trading 10 contracts of crude all the
time. The investment could be smaller if the number of crude contracts is
reduced, but we lose the ability to accurately balance the risk of both legs.
In the long run, that might not matter, but then it might.
TABLE 4.8 Calculation of market investment and portfolio investment (on
left) and market returns, portfolio returns, and portfolio NAVs (on right).
Step 4: Calculate the Portfolio Returns
The next panel shows the market returns, which are the daily profits or
losses divided by the total portfolio investment. The daily returns for the
three markets are added to get the portfolio returns, shown in the last
panel.
Finally, the portfolio NAVs are calculated in the same way as before,
starting with 100, and then each subsequent value for day t is
Next, calculate the annualized returns through day t (which begin with
100) as
The result is a return of 6.73%. We then calculate the annualized volatility
of portfolio returns and get 10.19%, lower than the target of 12% due to a
modest amount of diversification. The information ratio, which is the
annualized return divided by the annualized risk, is then 0.66. Most traders
would like this ratio to be greater than 1.0, but then the S&P passive ratio
is closer to 0.10 over the past 10 years. When we combine energy pairs
with other sector pairs, these results will improve.
In addition to being directionally neutral on price moves, a benefit of
pairs trading is that most pairs are in the market less than 50% of the time,
often closer to 25%. That means you are less exposed to price shocks and
general market risk. No matter how good the system, the only way to avoid
price shocks is to be out of the market. It's an important benefit.
Figure 4.7 shows the final portfolio NAVs as calculated using the steps
just explained. The method gains steadily over the 10 years, but as we
have discussed before, choosing the right time to trade will make a
difference. With higher oil prices, volatility is likely to remain high and
opportunities will be better.
FIGURE 4.7 Returns for the three natural gas energy pairs and the equally
weighted portfolio, at 10.2% volatility, 10 years from 2000.
Energy Summary
Although we found only three pairs that we would trade, it is a good sign
that we accomplished that using the exact same method and could have
used the same parameters as the original examples using stocks. Not
many trading methods hold up across different markets, especially moving
from stocks to futures. However, we needed to explain how we could justify
removing the three pairs that included only crude and its products.
Market experience must play a role. The relationship between crude oil
and its products, heating oil and gasoline, is called the crack spread. It is
intended to simulate the process of cracking crude oil (breaking its
hydrocarbon chain) into its products. Based on the amount of product that
can be extracted from crude oil, crack spreads are most often done in the
ratio 3:2:1, buying 3 contracts of crude and selling 2 gasoline contracts
and 1 heating oil contract. It is also done in the ratio 5:3:2. To be done
properly, the products should be traded one or two months out from the
crude contract to give the correct delivery relationship, for example,
February crude oil produces products that are ready for delivery in March
or April. Trying to arbitrage the crack spread using our pairs trading
method is the same as an amateur competing with professionals. It's a
difficult game to win. Figure 4.4 showed how closely heating oil prices
tracked crude oil, and Table 4.3 showed the long-term correlations, with
crude and heating oil at .90, crude and gasoline at .86, and gasoline and
heating oil at .84. There is no percentage for us to trade those
relationships. We need to look at markets in which there is a fundamental
relationship, or a psychological one, and the correlations are less than
0.80.
Heating Oil and Natural Gas
When we began looking at energy pairs, our choice would have been
heating oil and natural gas because they both serve the home heating
market. In the end, that pair was very profitable, but not nearly as good as
the crude–natural gas pair, which had higher average profits per contract,
as well as a higher information ratio, shown in Table 4.5.
We can conclude after the fact that a sloppy correlation in markets that
are fundamentally related can result in more opportunity. Figure 4.6 also
shows that returns are much better when prices and volatility are higher,
which we've seen since mid-2007, when the oil crisis began. In fact, returns
prior to that period were very small.
If we could only limit our trading to periods with exceptional moves, our
returns would be outstanding. That leads us to our next main topic, trading
inflation pairs, those markets that get the most attention from the financial
news networks and newspapers under the headline of inflation.
THE INFLATION PAIRS: CRUDE, THE
EURUSD, AND GOLD
If only we could trade during the extreme market moves and avoid the other
times. It's possible that volatility is the key to identifying price regimes, but
the reality is that it takes time to recognize a change in the market
structure. With a lag at the beginning and a lag at the end, we've usually
given up more than we gain by regime switching. One good example is
trend following. The key to profits in trend following is the fat tail, the
occasional very large profit from an extremely long trend that offsets many
small losses that came before. If you use a stop-loss with a long-term
trend, you exit the trade with expectations of saving money, but the trend is
not over; that is, it hasn't changed direction, and it may only have taken a
mid-trend correction. If you're wrong and the trend stays intact and
eventually becomes one of the few big winners, you've lost your chance at
net profits. Many of these strategies win by diversification and persistence.
The performance doesn't look perfect because it's not perfect, but it will
make money if you play by the rules.
Another opportunity seems to be in those markets perceived as causing
inflation, representing inflation, or being a hedge against inflation, namely,
crude oil, EURUSD, and gold. Although the U.S. government measures
inflation without food and energy, energy prices have an impact on
everything we buy. Because the price of energy is embedded in many
other costs, the government thinks it would be double-counting to include
raw energy prices in inflation calculations.
We'll take a simpler approach. Everyone knows that doubling the price
of crude oil would have a material effect on all commodity prices, as well
as disposable income. It also seems clear that the relationships between
these three markets become stronger when inflation is in the news.
Perhaps someday we will measure the number of square inches devoted
to inflation on the front page of the New York Times or Wall Street Journal
to determine when the time has come to trade the inflation pairs.
FIGURE 4.8 Components of inflation. EURUSD, crude oil, and gold prices
using back-adjusted futures.
The U.S. dollar started to weaken against the euro at the beginning of
2006 and so far has moved from 1.20 to 1.50, a loss of about 25%, before
recovering back to 1.20. Futures prices in Figure 4.8 show the relationship
between the euro, crude oil, and gold, although it is somewhat different
from the cash prices that we see on the news each day because they
represent both future expectation, the cost of carry, and backward
adjustment. But we will trade futures, so it's best to look at that data. All
three markets peak in mid-2008, drop quickly, and then rally through the
end of 2009. We won't try to decide if the relationship is led by crude oil or
by the expectation of large U.S. debt, the result of the financial market
bailout, diluting the dollar. Is there enough of a relationship to profit from
trading these as pairs?
To find out if we should trade these markets, we need to answer some
basic questions:
Would pairs created from these three markets have made
money using our strategy during the past three years?
Could we have known when to start trading them?
What parameters would we have used?
Different Values, Different Volatility
Remember that these three markets have very different contract sizes and,
therefore, different risk. A futures contract in the EURUSD has a face value
of $125,000, crude oil is 1,000 bbls × $80 = $80,000, and 100 troy ounces
of gold × $1,200 = $120,000 at the current price in May 2010. The
volatility, expressed in dollars per day (the easiest way to put them all into
the same common terms), must be used to determine the position size in
order to equalize the risk on both sides of the pairs trade. Table 4.9 shows
the imbalance between crude oil and gold in September 2008 during the
subprime crisis. Both markets were volatile, but crude was more so, as
shown by the smaller position, 10 contracts, compared with 17 gold
contracts. The Net PL column also points out the very large equity swings
from day to day, even though this trade netted a profit. Be sure to
remember that these prices are the result of continuous back-adjusting of
data, so they will not be the same as either the cash prices or futures
prices on those days.
TABLE 4.9 Trade in the crude-gold pair during high volatility.
Different Holidays
When we discussed trading futures at the beginning of this chapter, we
pointed out that these markets can have different hours and may not be
open on the same days. Because this is a systematic program, we need a
rule that tells us not to trade when one market is open and the other is
closed. This can be done in two ways:
1. If the data are omitted, that is, one date does not appear in one
of the markets.
2. If today's data are identical to yesterday's data, we assume it
was forward filled because there was no trading. Some data
services will repeat the data on a holiday.
When either of these situations occurs, no trades are entered or exited.
If only one market is closed, then the profit or loss is calculated for the
market that is open.
Results from 2007 through 2009
We've been consistently looking at results that use similar momentum
periods and entry thresholds. If we continue to do the same, we get the
results shown in Table 4.10.
TABLE 4.10 Test results in terms of the information ratio for three inflation
pairs: (b) Crude-EURUSD, (c) crude-gold, and (d) EURUSD-gold, plus (a)
the average of those pairs.

These tests include the range of momentum calculations from 14 to 5
days, but only one entry threshold, ±50. Our previous tests included ±50 as
the middle of the 40–60 range, but here we will look at varying the exit
threshold. An exit threshold greater than zero means that we exit shorts
sooner. For example, if the crude-EURUSD pair shows a stochastic
difference of 55, we sell crude and buy EURUSD. If the exit threshold is 20,
then the stochastic difference needs to drop only below 20, not to zero as
in our previous tests, to exit the trade. The trade-off is that we exit sooner
and avoid the risk associated with holding a position longer, but we will
also have smaller profits. However, we might get more trades because the
stochastic value can then increase again to above 50, generating a new
signal. We would be taking advantage of market noise.
To avoid too much complication, only the entry of ±50 is used. If the
results of using ±50 are poor, then it's not likely that we would be trading
these pairs. In addition, Table 4.10 includes a breakdown of the results of
each pair, as well as the average of all three.
Normally, we use the average of all pairs to decide the success of a
group of related markets, but with these inflation pairs, it's not clear that
they are related in the same way as, for example, energy markets. We
have chosen three very different markets that we believe are used as an
inflation hedge. The results will tell us how closely they track each other.
If we base our decision on the average of all pairs, shown in Table
4.10a, we find there were 15 of 18 profitable tests, and all the losing
combinations used the longest calculation period of 14 days. Longer
calculation periods imply longer holding periods for the trade, which
decreases the advantage of noise; therefore, it is consistent with our
concept. Our initial thought is that these pairs are good. The best ratios are
at the faster end of the test, a 5-day calculation period. The exit threshold
of ±10 is very good, with a ratio of 0.728, but the exit of ±20 is marginally
lower and would get us out sooner. Therefore, we expect to trade these
pairs with a momentum of 5, an entry of ±50, and an exit of ±20.
Fortunately, we also summarized the results of the individual pairs in
parts b, c, and d. All three pairs had very different performance, and the
average does not represent the sum of the parts.
Crude-EURUSD is the most consistent, with profits in every
combination and ratios varying from 0.301 to 0.909. The row
showing the detail for the calculation period of 10 is the best, but
it looks as though it's an outlier because, without that row, the
information ratio increases smoothly from the larger periods to
the smaller. We prefer to pick anything in the lower part of the
table. A momentum of 5 and exit of 10 seem reasonable and
somewhat typical.
Crude-gold is overall a poor performer, with only two profitable
combinations out of 18. Even though we thought this could be a
good pair, we need to eliminate it. By including these results in
the average, we might have distorted those values so that any
choice based on the average would also be poor.
EURUSD-gold has the widest range of performance, from
negative to very positive, and also has the highest average
ratios. It also seems inconsistent because the rows for
calculation periods 10 and 7 are much lower (but still profitable)
than most of the others. Choosing the momentum period 5 and
exit 10 from the lower section seems the safest.
Th at wasn't too difficult, but it was all hindsight. We picked the same
parameters for the two pairs that seem to work. The cumulative profits for
the period from 2007 through 2009 are plotted in Figure 4.9. The
EURUSD-gold pair is consistently profitable; the crude-EURUSD pair has
a fast, steady run-up, followed by a period sideways, before volatility and
profitability returns.
FIGURE 4.9 Cumulative PL for the three inflation pairs, crude-euro, crudegold,
and euro-gold, from 2007.
The answer to our first question is yes, we could have made money
during the period when these markets were considered an inflation hedge
by the public. The second question is more difficult.
Could We Have Known When to Start Trading
These Pairs?
We know that the subprime crisis caused unprecedented volatility. We can
measure that volatility using the formula most often used by the financial
industry:
In order to recognize a change in volatility, we calculate a rolling
standard deviation using the past 10 days. We've discussed before that
using only 10 days and annualizing the value will occasionally cause
annualized volatility to be greater than 100%. Because our interest is the
relative difference in volatility, that won't cause any problems.
In Figure 4.10, the annualized volatility of the three futures markets is
seen to change in late 2007, synonymous with the spike in crude oil but a
full nine months before the subprime crisis. Had we started trading these
pairs at that time, we would have captured the big moves in all three
markets. By September 2009, the volatility of the EURUSD and gold had
dropped back to previous levels. Crude followed in December 2009. Had
we stopped trading when the volatility returned to normal, we might have
netted profits in all three pairs.
FIGURE 4.10 Annualized price volatility of the euro, crude oil, and gold
shows spikes during the subprime crisis.
Using volatility seems to be a simple way to qualify trading in inflation
pairs. The volatile periods generate higher correlation between the
markets and also increase liquidity. More investors who would not normally
trade these markets are attracted to them during periods of high volatility.
They are also pushed along by the commentators on the financial news
networks, who manage to convince the public of correlations (and socalled
contagion) before they occur.
How Do We Decide, in Advance, Which
Parameters to Use?
The most difficult question of the three is how to determine, in advance,
which parameters to trade. The easiest answer is to find another period in
the past when inflation and volatility were in the news and test that data.
Certainly, the early 1980s would qualify, when gold rallied to $800/ounce
and interest rates topped at 21%. But we would have to trade the
Deutsche mark instead of the euro, which didn't exist at that time, and oil
wasn't a factor because the price was so low between the oil shortage in
the mid-1970s and the Iraq-Iran War in the mid-1980s that cost wasn't
significant. Gold has also been an unreliable gauge of inflation. After the
famous run to $800 in 1980, it came steadily down until it reached its low in
September 2000. Buying gold at any price during those 20 years would
have produced only steady losses.
We could not have found a similar situation using the same three
markets, but there may have been other pairs that would show improved
returns, and higher correlations, during volatile periods. If we look back at
Chapter 3, the use of a low-volatility filter identifies similar situations,
although much shorter time periods. It shows that pairs trading does best
during periods of higher volatility.
For now, we'll be satisfied with using the past three years to identify the
parameters, but if we can show that some other period had the same
results, our confidence would increase tremendously. On the other hand, if
we had no previous periods with the same profile, then we must base our
decision of what parameters to use on the belief that higher volatility will
generate the profits we need. There is often a point in developing a trading
system when you must make a leap of faith after you've done as much
work as possible. Tying performance to volatility seems to be a very small
leap.
A Last Word about Inflation Pairs
Trading during periods of high volatility can be very risky, but we expect
pairs trading to profit during high volatility because prices move apart
quickly and correct just as fast. During periods of low volatility, prices may
not move enough to generate profits in excess of costs. Markets that have
caught the interest of the general public can offer great opportunity,
triggered by a clear increase in volatility.
Having decided which of these markets reflects the most public interest,
experience seems to be the key. When we looked at the changing
correlations in the energy markets, we found that the dramatic rise in crude
prices corresponded to increased correlations between all energy futures.
We could attach a fundamental reason for that change; however, the
inflation pairs are much more deceptive. Figure 4.11 shows the rolling 20-
day correlations during the same period as the annualized volatility in
Figure 4.10. With volatility, we saw a clear increase at the end of 2007
associated with profitable pairs trading. The correlations show that the
crude-gold pair is generally more correlated and has moved to its
strongest relationship at the end of 2009. But the crude-gold pair was the
worst performer. There is a modest increase in the correlation of the EURgold
pair from the beginning of 2008 until mid-2009, but afterward that pair
is mostly negatively correlated, although by only a small amount. Yet EURgold
was the most consistently profitable pair. If the correlations don't tell
us anything, then we can only conclude that it's the money that moves the
market. The pairs are profitable because the public believes these
markets should react to inflation news, but their movements with regard to
one another are unpredictable, just as price noise is unpredictable but
profitable for a mean-reverting trader.
FIGURE 4.11 Rolling 20-day correlations of three inflation pairs. Crudegold,
which shows the highest correlation, had the worst performance.
EQUITY INDEX PAIRS
We now come to the equity index markets, which are probably the most
interesting for traders. During the past 10 years, these futures markets
have seen a tremendous increase in activity from traders around the world.
Although most of the European markets have been electronic since their
inception, the U.S. markets have been slower to change, but the liquidity is
now in the electronic contracts. Electronic trading has facilitated the ability
to execute on the CME, EUREX, SIMEX, and nearly any other exchange in
the world.
Many of the equity index markets can be traded as ETFs, but they are
not as liquid or as efficient as futures markets. They do allow you to sell
short with no restriction, and they do not need to be rolled when the
contracts expire. The results shown in this section all use the smallest
futures contracts traded, normally called minis. The commission costs for
trading minis are much higher for the noncommercial investor than trading
the original, larger contracts, but that's where all the liquidity is, so the
increased commission cost may be offset by less slippage. The data start
on November 21, 2005, when EUREX moved the close of the trading day
to 22:00 European time (10 P.M. in New York) and ends on May 1, 2010.
Given the windup needed to perform the calculations, this gives us nearly 4
1/2 years of performance for all markets. That can still generate a lot of
trades because we hold positions for only a few days.
The markets used to form pairs will be the S&P, Nasdaq, Russell, Dow,
EuroStoxx, DAX, CAC, and FTSE, a total of 8 markets and 28 pairs. Of
these pairs, 6 are combinations of U.S. markets, 6 are European, and the
remaining 16 are combinations of U.S. and European markets.
If you use the combined sessions for European markets, which means
the original pit session followed by the evening session, the data will all
end at nearly the same time. In the U.S., the evening session starts the new
day for the electronic markets, which then ends at the close of the next pit
session. In 2005, the European markets extended their hours to trade
alongside the U.S. markets, so that they now close at 10 P.M., equivalent
to 4 P.M. in New York. This facilitates pairs trading, even though volume on
the European exchanges at the 10 P.M. close is considerably lighter than
during European business hours. If Asian markets trade electronically 24
hours, it may be possible to include the Topix, Hang Seng, Nikkei, and
others, but those markets won't be included here.
Again, we point out that if either leg of the pair does not trade because
of a holiday, then no entries or exits are allowed, but daily profits and
losses are calculated for the leg that is open. Futures trading is always
marked to market each day. When we combine the results of the different
pairs into the final portfolio, we must pay attention to any missing days,
where there was no trading in one region but trading in the other. The
results must be aligned by date.
We already know from previous discussions that shorter calculation
periods are most likely to work because they capture more price noise, an
advantage for mean-reversion strategies. In this case, we just test a small
range of values to confirm that the same parameters work for the index
markets as they did for others. We are hopeful that the concept is robust
and will produce orderly results. There are only six tests, calculation
periods of 4 and 5 days, and entry thresholds of ±40, ±50, and ±60. A
commission of 25 currency units (USD, EUR, or GBP) per round-turn per
leg was charged to all trades, which is very conservative. Table 4.11
shows the results in terms of the information ratio.
TABLE 4.11 Average information ratio for 28 index pairs, from November
2005.
The results do not distinguish between good and bad pairs and are
simply the average of all 28. Because of that, we consider these quite
good and confirm our expectations that faster trading is better. The final
decision will be whether the profits per contract are large enough to offer
some comfortable cushion to absorb unexpected slippage above the $25
commission cost. We know from experience that the fastest parameters, a
period of 4 and short entry threshold of 40, will have the smallest unit
returns but the best ratio. We'll look at those results in more detail.
Table 4.12 shows the basic statistics for the fastest parameters, 4 × 40.
Only 4 of the 28 pairs show net losses; three of those pairs are
combinations of U.S. markets, and the other is Nasdaq–EuroStoxx. If we
try to classify the pairs into U.S. versus Europe and relate that grouping to
the performance, we find some consistency. For example, the higher the
correlation between the two legs, the lower the ratio and performance. If we
sort Table 4.12 by the correlation column and then create a scatter plot of
the correlations against ratios, we get the results in Table 4.13 and Figure
4.12.
TABLE 4.12 Results of all index pairs using a calculation period of 4 and
entry threshold of ±40.
Figure 4.12 is most descriptive. At the top left, the information ratio is
greatest and the correlation smallest. At the bottom right is the opposite
combination, high correlation and low performance. There seems to be a
combination, high correlation and low performance. There seems to be a
break in the chart at the horizontal line representing an information ratio of
1.0. Below that line, the values are spread out and less orderly; above the
line, they form a clear pattern up and to the left. We can now look back at
Table 4.13 and understand which pairs are most likely to succeed.
TABLE 4.13 Index pairs in Table 4.12, sorted by correlation, highest to
lowest.
FIGURE 4.12 Scatter plot of index pairs showing the relationship between
the correlation of the two legs and the ratio of the performance.
Starting from the top of Table 4.13 , we can see that most of the
combinations involve one U.S. index market and one European index
market. The correlation of 0.431 between the Russell 2000 and the FTSE
shows that these markets have only a modest relationship; that is, they
move apart due to very different fundamentals but revert to the mean
because all index markets react to global economic factors. Even more
important than the global factors is the way traders buy and sell these
markets, forcing them into similar patterns. While the economy of the U.K.
may be perceived as quite different from that of the U.S., when the U.S.
economic reports show unexpected strength or weakness, the FTSE
reacts to that information. Similarly, there is a smaller but noticeable
reaction in other countries if the Bank of England is the first to lower or
raise interest rates after a period of stable rates.
Within Europe, the most profitable pairs are between the British FTSE
and the German DAX or the EuroStoxx. These represent the widest
difference in fundamentals within Europe, with the U.K. not part of the EU
and seen as a weaker economy at the moment. But with most of the total
trade occurring between these two regions, their economies are clearly
linked, and their equity index markets must reflect that relationship.
The only pair of U.S. equity index markets to make the cut is the Russell-
Nasdaq, showing the highest correlation, 0.933. All of the U.S. equity index
pairs show very high correlations, making the unit returns necessarily
small. At the bottom of the performance list are three U.S. pairs. Although
none of the same companies are part of the S&P 500 and Russell 2000
(large cap and small cap), they move in the same way and provide no
opportunity for profit.
FIGURE 4.13 Momentum values for the S&P and Dow minicontracts
during 2008 and 2009 using a calculation period of 8. None of the
momentum differences reaches ±40.
A clear example is the S&P-DJIA pair. Of course, all 30 stocks in the
DJIA are also in the S&P, and because the DJIA stocks have the largest
cap, they represent a disproportionate part of the S&P. The correlation is
shown as 0.949 in Table 4.13 . Figure 4.13 shows the momentum
difference, the basis for the pairs signals, based on a calculation period of
8 days. While the two individual momentum values range from 0 to 100, the
momentum difference reaches near 40 only once since 2000 and peaks
over 20 only a few times during the entire period. Table 4.12, which has the
detail for the 4-day momentum, shows that there were only five trades over
the past five years, and those did not generate enough profit to overcome
costs.
FIGURE 4.14 (a) Sample PL for S&P pairs (4 × 40) with European equity
index futures, converted to USD, and (b) sample NAVs for S&P pairs with
U.S. equity index futures.
Pairs using the S&P futures contract are a typical example of results. In
Figure 4.14, we see the NAVs of the seven pairs. The calculation of the
NAVs will be given in the next section. For now, Figure 4.14a shows the
best results are for the FTSE and CAC, with correlations against the S&P
of 0.513 and 0.577, compared with the EuroStoxx and DAX with
correlations of 0.823 and 0.791. However, all four results could be
combined into a profitable portfolio. Note that the intervals with horizontal
lines indicate there was no trading.
Figure 4.14b shows the results of the U.S. equity index pairs. The DJIA,
the bottom line, shows long periods of no trading, confirming the high
correlation exhibited in Figure 4.13. In the middle, Nasdaq has trades but
can't overcome the commission cost, and at the top, the Russell shows
positive returns, but all based on one distortion during September 2008.
We would not want to base our expectations on having to repeat a 50%
drop in the stock market.
Portfolio Diversification
Combining performance into a portfolio shows the value of diversification.
To make this a manageable example, we will use only the four S&P pairs
with the European index futures, the CAC, DAX, EuroStoxx, and FTSE,
shown in Figure 4.14a. We start with the daily profits and losses and
combine them, first adjusting each to a target volatility and then adjusting
the final portfolio to a target volatility. Each step is explained in the
following.
Step 1. Align the Daily Profits and Losses
Table 4.14 starts on the first day of available data. The first pairs trade is
initiated on December 8, 2005, and doesn't show a profit or loss until the
close of the next day. In the left panel, the daily profits and losses are
aligned by date. When using U.S. and European pairs, there will be many
days when one or the other market doesn't trade, but the alignment
process affects the signal generation rather than the profits and losses
shown in the table.
TABLE 4.14 Constructing a portfolio with an annualized volatility of 12%
from daily profits and losses.

Step 2. Normalize the Volatility and Find the
Investment Size
To give each pair an equal chance to contribute to the portfolio profits, we
need to equalize the volatility of each pair. First calculate the standard
deviation (volatility) of the return streams (not the cumulative profits) of
each of the four pairs, and multiply each by the square root of 252 (the
nominal number of business days in a year) to get the annualized volatility.
Note that the profits and losses have first been converted to U.S. dollars
using the daily spot exchange rates for the euro and sterling.
Once we have those values, shown in Table 4.15 , we take the target
volatility of 12% and divide that by the annualized volatility of each pair to
get the investment size that would make the profit and loss changes equal
to 12%. The total portfolio investment is the sum of the individual
investments, $1,280,915. We could also have started with an investment
size and converted the daily profits and losses to returns using that value,
but we will cover that method later.
TABLE 4.15 Annualized standard deviation and corresponding investment
needed to have an annualized volatility of 12%.
Step 3. Calculate the Returns for Each Pair
The second panel of Table 4.14 , Daily Returns from Total Investment, is
simply the daily profits and losses in the first panel, divided by the total
investment size, the sum of the individual investments.
Step 4: Create the NAVs
The final NAVs must reflect our target volatility, the amount of risk we are
willing to take. When we calculate the annualized standard deviation of the
portfolio return column, we get 0.2236, more than 22%, an unacceptably
high number. To adjust to our 12% target volatility, each return must be
multiplied by 0.537. Then the NAVs begin at 100 and each subsequent
NAV is
The final NAV stream at 12% volatility is shown in Figure 4.15. Although
the performance flattens out in 2009, a portfolio of more pairs would add
diversification and consistency. All pairs using the S&P are likely to have
similar performance.
FIGURE 4.15 Portfolio of four S&P pairs adjusted to 12% volatility.
An alternative approach to constructing this portfolio, and one that will be
useful when using diverse sectors, is to assign an arbitrary or an actual
portfolio investment size. In this case, we can still use the sum of the
investment sizes calculated using our current method, $1,280,915. We
then
Calculate the returns of each pair by dividing the daily profit or
loss by the investment size, the same as the returns shown in
panel 2.
Next, find the annualized volatility of the returns of each pair.
Only the one with the highest volatility, the FTSE, will show 12%.
The others are
The factor in the table is the multiplier that changes the volatility
to 12% for each return's stream.
We calculate the portfolio returns by using Excel's sumproduct
function, which multiplies each daily return by the factor and
adds them together to get a portfolio return for that day.
Again, we find the annualized standard deviation of the new
portfolio returns and get 0.025. Dividing the target volatility of
0.12 by 0.025 gives a new return factor of 4.863.
The final NAVs are created using the last formula given, but the
return factor is 4.863 instead of 0.537.
Yo u might think that this second method is unnecessary because it gives
the same results as the simpler method shown first. However, when
dealing with portfolios composed of diverse sectors, such as interest
rates, equity index, and foreign exchange (FX), you must have each sector
adjusted to the same volatility before you combine them into the final mix.
For example, if you are allocating to these three sectors equally, and the
interest rates have an annualized volatility of 5%, the equity index markets
20%, and FX 25%, then your risk exposure is 10% for rates, but 40% for
index and 50% for FX. The profits and losses from interest rates will have
only a small impact on the total portfolio. To maximize diversification, you
must have all sectors adjusted to the same risk level before you apply your
portfolio allocation percentage.
LEVERAGING WITH FUTURES
During the construction of the futures pairs, a target volatility of 12% was
used. That means we have the ability to vary the number of futures
contracts that we trade without increasing the portfolio investment size.
There is a limit to the amount of leverage you can get using futures, but
most investors should expect that their exposure (the face value of the
futures contracts being traded) can be 4 to 6 times their investment. That's
not possible with pairs using only stocks, where the cost of trading is the
number of shares times the price per share. We don't consider stock
margining, in which you borrow part of the funds.
We have discussed that margin in futures is very different from equities.
Margin is a good faith deposit, where you are obligated to invest on
average about 10% of the face value of the purchases. For example, if you
buy one contract of crude oil at $80, you own 1,000 barrels, a value of
$80,000. Typically, you need only a deposit of $8,000 unless you are a
qualified commercial trader (in the oil business, a hedger), in which case
your margin might be only 5%, or $4,000. Commercials are often able to
provide a bank letter that guarantees any losses; therefore, it is not clear
how much they put up as margin or what leverage they get.
Spreads are also given preferential margin. The exchange recognizes
that buying one oil product and selling another related product has less risk
than an outright position; therefore, the margin is also less, perhaps 5%.
For exact amounts and which combinations of spreads qualify, you will
need to refer to the exchange web sites, as well as contact your broker.
Brokerage firms must conform to the exchange minimum requirements for
margin, but they may choose to ask for more if they feel that the risk is
higher.
Cross-market spreads, such as the S&P-DAX may not get lower
margins, although some exchanges have cross-margin agreements. But
let's use energy pairs as an example of leveraging.
Leverage Example
An example will make this clearer. Going back to the crude–natural gas
pair, we calculate the annualized volatility of the daily profits and losses
using the standard method: the standard deviation times the square root of
252. We get $132,671. An investment of $1,105,593 is needed to give
that performance a volatility of 12% of the portfolio. However, with stocks
we found that the amount needed as an investment was fixed, based on
the number of shares times the share value. That's not the case for futures.
Table 4.16 gives the necessary calculation.
TABLE 4.16 Calculations needed to understand leverage in futures
markets.
For the pairs trade in crude–natural gas, we often took positions of 10
contracts in each leg; therefore, we will use that quantity here. The first
column of Table 4.16 is the current price of crude and natural gas, followed
by the size of the contract and the total value per contract. If we buy or sell
10 contracts, we are trading $800,000 worth of crude oil and $500,000 in
natural gas, at total exposure of $1,300,000. The exchange considers a
spread in two related markets as having less risk and will give lower
margin requirements, for example, 5%. The last column shows that the
amount needed to buy 10 crude and sell 10 natural gas is only $65,000.
If we could invest only the margin, our leverage would be 20:1. The
volatility of $132,671 would be more than 200% rather than our target of
12%. However, brokerage firms require more than margin, although the
exact amount varies from firm to firm and is also based on the net worth of
the client and the amount of trading activity expected. Ironically, a good
client, such as a hedge fund that trades in a large number of contracts, will
have lower requirements, and those deposits might be a small amount of
cash plus a credit note or some other form of collateral. As with Long-Term
Capital Management, the bigger you get, the more you can negotiate,
regardless of the exposure to risk.
But let's say you are an ordinary investor and the brokerage firm
requires 4 times the margin as your deposit. That would change the
$65,000 margin to a minimum investment of $260,000 and reduce the
200% volatility to a fourth, or 50%. Therefore, the amount required in your
investment account for trading futures determines the amount of leverage
you can achieve. In this case, $260,000 to buy $1.3 million in energy
futures gives you a leverage of 5:1.
Varying the Leverage
In trading the crude–natural gas pairs, we varied the number of contracts
but averaged no more than 10 per leg. Most investment managers target
12% volatility, or less, the same level we have been using in our examples.
Starting with the volatility of 50% based on a margin of 5% and
brokerage requirements of 4 times the margin, we can reduce the
annualized volatility of the portfolio to 12% by dividing the current volatility
of 0.50 by the target volatility, giving a factor of 4.16. Then the investment
needed to trade an average of 10 contracts of each leg is 4.16 × $260,000
= $1,083,333. The less you invest, the greater the leverage and the greater
the risk. Remember that an annualized volatility of 12% means that there is
still a 16% chance of seeing a loss greater than 12% in one year, and a
2.5% chance of having a loss greater than 24%. And if you don't see that
loss in your first year, the chances are greater that you'll see it in the next
year. By anyone's standards, that can be a lot of risk.
LONDON METALS EXCHANGE PAIRS
The six nonferrous metals traded on the London Metals Exchange (LME)
are another group of futures markets that seems natural for arbitrage. This
group of markets consists of aluminum, copper, lead, nickel, tin, and zinc.
In different ways, each of these markets is related to each of the others
through commercial and individual home construction, copper for
plumbing, others for stainless steel. It is said that the floor traders will
arbitrage any combination of these markets because, during an expanding
economy or real estate boom, they all move in the same direction. Figure
4.16 shows that the six markets have similar movements, although nickel
seems to be out of phase with the others.
FIGURE 4.16 LME nonferrous metals, from January 2000 through April
2009, quoted in USD per tonne. There is similar movement in all markets,
but nickel seems to be out of phase with the others.
Trading on the LME is different from trading on other exchange-traded
futures markets. First, trading occurs during four sessions, when each
metal is traded for a relatively short period in turn. The traders aren't
standing in a pit yelling and using hand signals; most often, they are
directors of large metals firms sitting in a circle, called a ring. Although
there could be a lot of active trading when prices are moving quickly, it
could also look more like a poker game during quiet times. Contract sizes
are large, and delivery dates are designated during trading; they do not
need to be on specific dates set by the exchange but can correspond to
the commercial needs of the trader. For convenience, we can choose a
delivery date for copper, for example, that corresponds to the same
delivery date as the NYMEX copper contract, but any delivery date is
acceptable when trading. For these tests, we use the rolling three-month
contract, so that any position entered will deliver three months from the
entry date. That gives enough time to exit the trade without the need to roll
forward or be forced out because of contract expiration and delivery.
Using the same parameters and rules we have for other markets, we
tested the six LME metals from January 2000 through April 2009. The
results, shown in Table 4.17 , are dismal. Not one combination was
profitable. As we noticed in the price chart, Figure 4.16, nickel has the
lowest overall correlation to the other metals, but the pairs aluminumcopper,
aluminum-zinc, and copper-zinc all have reasonably good
correlations. We would have expected them to be profitable. There is
always something to be learned by looking at more detail. Sometimes you
find a relationship that can make the entire process, including the good
results we've already seen, even better—often by reducing the risk. With
that end in mind, we will look at the pair of the two most liquid markets,
aluminum and copper, at the top of the table.
TABLE 4.17 LME pairs results, January 2000 to April 2009, using
parameters ±50 x 10.
To understand the price relationship between the aluminum and copper,
we need a more accurate view of prices, found in Figure 4.17. The two
metals have very similar moves, although copper is significantly more
volatile. The bull market that started in 2003 first peaks in 2006 but doesn't
collapse until the subprime crisis in 2008. While the copper price drop in
2007 is not seen in aluminum, many of the other moves are similar. Given
volatility adjustments for position size, these two look as though they are a
good candidate for pairs trading.
FIGURE 4.17 Price moves in aluminum and copper have many similarities
that would make them a good candidate for pairs trading.
The returns, however, don't reflect what we think should be true. Profits
were generated steadily through late 2006, followed by a large drawdown,
and finally another profitable period beginning in late 2007, shown in
Figure 4.18. What happened to cause the large losing period? Our first
thought is to look at volatility.
FIGURE 4.18 Cumulative profits/losses for the aluminum-copper pair.
Profits drop sharply beginning in October 2006 and then rally in late 2007.
The standard calculation for volatility is the standard deviation of returns
times the square root of 252. Although 20 days is standard for option
volatility, we use 14 days to correspond to the same period as the
stochastic indicator used for momentum. Using 14 days rather than 20 will
be a little less stable; that is, fewer days will tend to show more volatility. In
Figure 4.19, we see that copper has been much more volatile than
aluminum, spiking to about 80 in 2006, when aluminum reached only 40,
and peaking at almost 110 in 2008, when aluminum reached about 45.
However, neither of these spikes corresponds to the problem dates seen
in the cumulative profits and losses. In fact, when the subprime crisis drove
the price of copper sharply lower, the pairs trade was adding steady gains
to the total returns. But when a pairs trade has a large imbalance in the
position size, then there is potential risk and potential loss. For example, if
we had 20 contracts of aluminum and 5 of copper, then we can say that
copper is four times more volatile. Because volatility is measured over only
14 days, that value can change quickly. If aluminum became volatile and
copper quiet, we would be exposed to large swings in returns. We can say
that it would be prudent to limit the trades entered when there is a large
position imbalance.
FIGURE 4.19 Volatility of aluminum and copper as measured by the
annualized standard deviation.
Dangers of High Leverage
As a side note, the large discrepancy between the position sizes means
that we have assumed much greater leverage in one market based on
relatively low volatility. This situation is similar to what happened in the
hedge fund industry in 2010 for those trading interest rates.
As yields fell to unprecedented low levels, they also showed
exceptionally low volatility. If rates are only one of a number of sectors in
the hedge fund portfolio, then the returns of that sector must be leveraged
up to have the same impact as other sectors and provide both comparable
returns and diversification. Then, as interest rate volatility fell, positions got
bigger, and at some point they were disproportionally large compared with
other sectors. This poses a real threat of disaster due to event risk. A price
shock that moves the market against you can wipe out all your gains—and
perhaps your entire investment.
The only way to avoid this is to cap your leverage, that is, put a limit on
the size of the position you can take based on low volatility. That would
reduce the risk, but capping one sector or asset puts the portfolio out of
balance. Interest rates would not contribute the right amount to the
diversification of the portfolio, and the hedge fund has reduced its
diversification.
If maintaining the diversification is most important (and it is an important
way to control risk), then all positions in the portfolio must be reduced in the
same ratio when the interest rates are capped. That way, the shape of the
portfolio remains the same. Unfortunately, potential returns are reduced
along with the risk, but you can't have both. Keeping the integrity of the
shape of the portfolio at the cost of lower returns and lower risk is the best
choice for the investor.
FIGURE 4.20 Volatility of aluminum and copper as measured by the
average true range.
average true range.
Alternate Way of Calculating Pairs Risk
We are now concerned that large differences in the annualized volatility,
combined with equally different position sizes in the legs of the pairs trade,
can result in unacceptably large risk. But the position size is calculated
using the average true range (ATR), so we need to see if that tells us
anything. Figure 4.20 shows that a structural change took place in early
2006 that may correspond to the drop in performance. Copper volatility
spiked above $600/tonne while aluminum reached only $150/tonne, a ratio
of 4:1. Although the change in volatility looks clear, we might also find an
imbalance before 2006, possibly at the beginning of 2004, when copper
volatility touched $100/tonne and aluminum was well down, near
$30/tonne. Using the ATR instead of the traditional annualized volatility
measure gives us much more information.
To distinguish between high volatility and extreme volatility, we will
create a rule that combines both the annualized standard deviation and the
average true range.
Do not enter a new position, and exit any existing trade, if both of the
following two factors hold:
1. The ratio of the position sizes is less than the position ratio
threshold (this can be written as min(size1/size2,size2/size1) <
position ratio threshold).
2. The annualized volatility of leg 1 > annualized volatility
threshold or the annualized volatility of leg 2 > annualized volatility
threshold (called the “high” filter).
To see if our premise works, and to find the value of the thresholds, we
run a series of tests on values of both thresholds. For the annualized
standard deviation, the choices are 15% through 30% in varying small
steps of 5% or less (the high filter), and for the average true range, we test
from 0.20 through 0.90, in steps of 0.10. The results are given in Table
4.18. The pattern of improvement is consistent for the ATR, but much
narrower for the annualized volatility (STD). We also looked at trading only
when the volatility was high—that is, removing trades below the threshold
—as shown in the part of the table marked STD Low. Results were actually
more consistent than STD High, but the number of trades was very small. If
we look at the cumulative profits and losses of the best filter tests,
compared with no filters and with both filters, we can see the results in
Figure 4.21.
Can we use these results? The ATR and the ATR plus the STD low filter
look good, and the result is just what we wanted. The statistics for the
combined filters, STD 30 (low) and ATR 35, had 31 trades, $47,071 in
profits, 6.5% annualized return, and a ratio of 0.539. There was no trading
during the period of loss in 2006 and 2007, and the cumulative profits
move steadily higher. That's all good.
On the negative side, we have clearly fitted the results. It's good that the
ATR had progressively better performance and consistent ratios, but the
positive results from the annualized standard deviation were in a very
narrow range, and the best results used the most volatile prices when we
TABLE 4.18 Test results showing the comparison of filter thresholds for
aluminum-copper.
FIGURE 4.21 Aluminum-copper cumulative PL with volatility filters.
were trying to filter those periods. For that reason, we would reject the
annualized volatility results (both STDs) and use only the ATR filter. In
Figure 4.21, the combined filters results are identical to the ATR filter
results except at the very end, where the use of the STD adds some value.
Distortion Filter
In Chapter 3, we introduced the high-distortion filter, or distortion ratio. This
is a simple way of recognizing when two markets are acting very differently
based entirely on the relative position sizes needed to equalize the
volatility of the two legs. The implication is that when the two legs have very
different volatilities, then:
The leg with the lower volatility and the larger position may have
an unusually big move, causing an unusually large profit or loss
relative to the other leg.
Or the leg with the lower volatility and the larger position may not
move at all, thus not providing the market-neutral effect that we
are trying to achieve.
Th e distortion ratio is simply the minimum of the leg 1 position size
divided by the leg 2 position size or the leg 2 size divided by the leg 1 size,
so that the distortion increases as the ratio gets smaller. For example, if
the leg 1 size is 10 contracts and the leg 2 size is 7 contracts, then the
distortion ratio is 0.7; or if leg 1 is 7 and leg 2 is 10, the ratio is also 0.7. In
Table 4.19 , the distortion ratio is tested against both the 14- (left) and 4-
day (right) momentum results of the aluminum-copper pair. In both cases,
the results are significantly improved by choosing trades that have similar
volatility (higher ratios); however, these levels are different for each of the
calculation periods. The position sizes are based on the same calculation
periods as the momentum, so it should not be surprising that these levels
are different. By fixing the period for determining position size, rather than
using the same period as the momentum calculation, these results will be
more uniform and interpreted as robust.
TABLE 4.19 The distortion ratio applied to both the 14- and 4-day
momentum results for the aluminum-copper pair.
It is equally important to view the results of using the distortion filter.
Figure 4.22 makes this clear. The filter does exactly what it is intended to
do: remove trades that could present higher risk, and keep those trades
with more balanced positions. The 4-day momentum produces twice as
many trades as the 14-day, so there are more remaining after the filter is
applied. As we can see from the horizontal lines in the figure, there are
long periods of time with no trades, although fewer with the 4-day
momentum. Our conclusion is that the filter works, but we're not interested
in trading it because there is not enough activity. We have learned two
important points:
1. The distortion filter has merit.
FIGURE 4.22 Net performance of the aluminum-copper pairs after
applying the distortion filter.
2. We can find a way of turning a loss into a profit.
But have we just completed an exercise in overfitting? We could go on to
test if the filter works on other LME pairs, but the overall results of pairs
trading are poor. In the next chapter, we will change our approach and look
at trends in these pairs, but before moving on, there is another example of
volatility distortion that makes this distortion index more relevant.
Lead and Zinc
If we think of this as an in-sample test, we now want to know if using the
ATR as a filter works for the other pairs. We've rejected the use of the
annualized standard deviation. We choose to look at lead-zinc because it
has an average number of trades (72), average correlation (0.549)
compared to the high correlation for aluminum-copper (0.723), and poor
performance, shown in Figure 4.23. Returns follow the same pattern as
aluminum-copper, gaining small, steady profits until 2006, then dropping
precipitously before a recovery begins. Given the same pattern, we would
like the exact same solution to work. Unfortunately, that's not the case.
While the original test with no filters had 72 trades, a loss of $9,304, and a
ratio of –0.100, the ATR filter of 0.35 had 61 trades, a loss of $26,354, and
a ratio of –0.178. Why are the results so different?
FIGURE 4.23 Cumulative PL for lead-zinc shows the same general pattern
as the aluminum-copper pair.
Because we are filtering volatility, a look at the relative volatility of lead
and zinc, compared with aluminum and copper, should show why our filter
didn't work. In Figure 4.24, the annualized standard deviation is much the
same for the two markets, unlike the extreme volatility of copper. We see
that lead was more volatile in late 2008, but zinc had been more volatile in
mid-2006. Overall, there is not enough of a difference to distinguish one
from the other. But then, we are no longer using the annualized volatility.
FIGURE 4.24 The annualized volatilities of lead and zinc show that they
are very similar and would not be useful to distinguish risk.
On the other hand, the ATR in Figure 4.25 again shows that it's a better
measure of volatility. In 2006, zinc spikes well above lead, much more than
copper above aluminum. With its peak at about 270 and the
corresponding peak in lead at about 60, zinc is more volatile by a factor of
4.5. Unlike copper, which remained more volatile than aluminum, zinc fell
back into its previous pattern and even trades marginally below the
volatility of lead.
FIGURE 4.25 ATR volatility comparison of lead and zinc shows a different
pattern from aluminum and copper.
TABLE 4.20 Test of the ATR filter for lead-zinc shows profits once past the
0.50 threshold (twice the position size).
Is there a threshold value that turns lead-zinc losses into profits? To find
that answer, it is necessary to run tests on various values of the ATR
threshold, actually the ratio of the position sizes calculated using the ATR.
Those results can be seen in Table 4.20 . If you look back at the copper
tests in Table 4.18 (the bottom panel), the returns jumped from a large loss
to a large gain when the threshold increased from 0.25 to 0.35. Here we
started from 0.35 because that value showed a loss, then moved up. As
the threshold becomes larger, the relative difference between the position
sizes that will cause the filter to be activated will become smaller. For this
pair, the trigger value is 0.50, where one position is twice the size of the
other. Any trade with one leg twice that of the other will not be entered, and
if at any time during the trade, the volatility of the two legs is such that one
is more than twice the other, that trade will be exited.
Using the ATR threshold of 0.50, the cumulative profits are shown in
Figure 4.26. Again, it is similar to the filtered results of aluminum-copper. It
avoids trades during the highly volatile period in 2006, then begins trading
again when the relative volatility of the two legs comes back to normal. It
seems reasonable. Should you be comfortable trading this method? No.
FIGURE 4.26 Cumulative PL for lead-zinc using the ATR filter of 0.50.
VOLATILITY FILTERS
This chapter gives a simple solution to a basic pairs trading concept. We
enter when the two prices are relatively far apart. We exit when they come
back together. We adjust the two legs so that we have equal risk and equal
opportunity. That worked well for the housing sector and the equity index
markets, where all pairs used exactly the same parameters.
We then found that the metals markets do not work well under extreme
volatility. It is clear that the metals pairs we observed had very similar
patterns and could be solved by creating a volatility filter—that is, a relative
volatility filter—to identify when one of the legs was much more volatile than
the other. We reason that the more volatile leg could overwhelm the profits
and losses, or that the less volatile leg has the potential of becoming much
more volatile (possibly due to event risk), causing our risk balancing to fail.
Although the same situation occurs with each pair, the volatility threshold
would also be different for each one. Is that an acceptable solution?
You may rationalize the results and say that we should expect those
differences and that if the threshold is only shifted up or down by some
small amount, then the answer is still valid. It may not be possible for
anyone to say whether that is right or wrong. The market will tell you. For
now, let us say that the better solution is when the parameters and rules
are identical for all pairs.
INTEREST RATE FUTURES
There are many similarities between equity index and interest rate futures.
There are at least four exceptionally liquid markets in the U.S. (Eurodollars,
5-year notes, 10-year notes, and 30-year bonds), and there are
comparable futures markets in Europe (Euribor, Eurobobl, Eurobund,
British long gilt, and the short sterling). As you would expect, there are
stronger correlations between interest rate markets than between equity
index markets. Our experience says that with high correlations, profits
would be very small and survival would depend on extremely low
transaction costs, the venue of the professional traders. That does not turn
out to be entirely true. There is opportunity trading interest rate pairs when
one leg is a U.S. interest rate and the other is European.
Rather than include those markets in this chapter, we will look at them in
Chapter 7, “Revisiting Pairs Using the Stress Indicator.” Readers are
encouraged to try these pairs using the momentum difference method
covered in Chapters 3 and 4.
SUMMARY
Although the rules were clearly specified in Chapter 3 and the same
parameters were used for all examples in this chapter, the purpose was to
show how a simple method can be used in different markets to create
trading opportunities. No rules or calculations have been omitted, but
some of the test statistics were summarized and not shown in detail.
To implement this, you will need to put this into a spreadsheet or
computer program and verify all the results. You cannot rely on anyone
else's numbers when it's your money that is at risk. You will need to
understand the process, do the calculations, and place the orders with
precision. To help you, there are sample spreadsheets available at
www.wiley.com/go/alphatrading.
Chapter 5
Risk-Adjusted Spreads
Not all trading that removes directional risk is mean reverting. There are
times when two related markets move steadily apart, with one product
more desirable than another or one company doing better than another.
There are many examples in the stock market. One classic case was Dell
and Compaq. Compaq was the early success story in personal computers
and the first company to use MS-DOS (the first product of Microsoft) in the
early 1980s. In a sign of the evolution of small computers, Compaq
acquired Digital Equipment Corporation in 1998, the most prestigious
minicomputer company. In another turn of the tables, Dell's new business
model, selling computers with no retail outlets, rapidly overwhelmed other
manufacturers, and by 2002 Compaq was forced to merge with Hewlett-
Packard. Even the Compaq name didn't survive for long.
DELL AND HEWLETT-PACKARD
For the past 10 years, Dell and Hewlett-Packard share prices have flipflopped,
with Dell leading for the first five years and HP overtaking Dell in
2006, as shown in Figure 5.1. An investor normally takes advantage of
these broad moves by studying the fundamentals of both companies. If
they are clever enough to realize that Dell's business model worked
brilliantly when profit margins were high but would suffer as price
competition became more intense, they could have sold Dell short and
bought Hewlett-Packard, netting a hefty gain. But our focus is on
systematic, algorithmic trading.
FIGURE 5.1 Dell and Hewlett-Packard share prices from 2000.
A basic way to track these markets is to use the standard 200-day
moving average. The only thing special about the 200-day moving average
is that many traders watch it and it has taken on the role of a significant
indication of market trend. We might have expected a 250-day, a 125-day,
or a 63-day average to be more interesting because they are multiples of
calendar quarters (in business days), and stocks report earnings quarterly.
However, it's never a good idea to fight the market, so we'll stay with 200
days. Figure 5.2 shows the 200-day averages for Dell and HP from 2000.
The trends are very clear and remain intact for months and years at a time.
Simply buying when the trend turns up and selling short when the trend
turns down would have been a successful strategy.
FIGURE 5.2 The 200-day moving averages applied to Dell and Hewlett-
Packard.
However, following the trend of these two stocks independently means
that from 2003 through mid-2005, you would have been long both
companies and, during 2001 and from 2008 through mid-2009, you would
have been short both. During those periods, amounting to about half the
data, you would be exposed to directional risk. The purpose of this book is
to avoid directional risk; therefore, we'll only look at positions where we are
short one stock and long the other.
If we're patient, we could trade only when the two trends are going in
opposite directions. That would actually give us hedged positions, some of
which would be held for a long time. It also would create a lot of small
trades, many of which will be losses. Even though the moving averages
look smooth, and we take our positions from the direction of the moving
average, the eye can deceive us. During the sideways period in 2002, the
Dell trend wiggled up and down, causing false signals. Figure 5.3 shows
the spread trades by posting a +1 when we are buying Dell and selling
short HP, a –1 when we are selling Dell short and buying HP, and a 0 when
we have no position (both trends are moving in the same direction). We
want the chart to have continuous horizontal lines at +1 or –1, which means
that we held the trade for a long time, as we did from about September
2005 through April 2007. Unfortunately, that is the only sustained position.
From mid-2001 through April 2005, the lines going up and down indicate
positions that have been closed out and reset. When more positions are
reset, there are more losses.
FIGURE 5.3 Dell-HP trades when their trends are going in the opposite
direction.
The better way to look at the Dell-HP trade is by using the ratio of their
prices, in this case Dell divided by HP. Some analysts use the difference
in prices, but that creates a very different picture. For example, when Dell
and HP were both $25, the ratio would be 1.0 and the difference would be
zero. If Dell moved to $50 while HP remained at $25 then the ratio would
be 2.0 and the difference $25. The ratio indicates that Dell is twice the
price of HP, even if Dell was $100 and HP was $50. At that point, the
difference would be $50. We would need to remember the starting value of
$25 to know that we had doubled the difference. As prices got higher, the
differences would also get larger, reflecting higher volatility. But the ratio
remains a percentage measurement and offers more consistency.
FIGURE 5.4 The Dell/HP ratio with a 200-day moving average.
FIGURE 5.5 The Dell-HP difference with a 200-day moving average.
Figures 5.4 and 5.5 show the ratio and difference, each with a 200-day
moving average. Both of the trends are smoother than the trends of the two
stocks separately, as seen in Figure 5.2. The ratio shows a few sustained,
smooth trends, while the trend of the differences has two periods where it
reversed direction numerous times, during 2003 and 2004 and then again
in 2008 and 2009. Strictly from a practical view, the ratio performs better.
To show this clearly, we calculated the number of trades for each method,
where a trade is based only on the direction of the moving average line
and not triggered by the price penetrating the moving average. The trend
of the ratio had only 6 trades based on the changing direction of the 200-
day trend line, while the trend of the differences had 60 trades over the
same period, of which 17 were reversed after only one day. Without
calculating the performance of the differences, the net returns using
differences are likely to be a large loss.
To trade the ratio, we buy Dell and sell HP short when the trend of the
ratio is up, and sell Dell short and buy HP when the trend of the ratio is
down. As we did for pairs trading in the previous two chapters, the
positions must be balanced according to their volatility. This maximizes
diversification and reduces risk. In this case, the volatility was calculated
using the average true range over the past 120 days, and the size of the
positions were not changed during the length of the trade. Table 5.1 shows
the six individual trades for the Dell/HP ratio. In 2001, HP was more volatile
than Dell; consequently, it has only 79 shares compared with Dell's 100.
During the next few years, as Dell showed more success than HP, it shows
more volatility and smaller positions than HP. Overall, the percentage
returns over less than nine years were greater than 11% per annum. More
important, the big picture satisfies our general concept of when we would
go long and short these two stocks, given a strategic approach to trading.
And, of course, there is no directional risk.
TABLE 5.1 Trades for Dell and HP using the 200-day moving average of
the Dell/HPQ ratio.

TRADING BOTH LONG-TERM
(HEDGED) TRENDS AND SHORTTERM
MEAN REVERSION
The trades in this chapter focus on the long-term divergence of two stocks
or futures markets. This divergence can occur even while there are shortterm
opportunities for statistical arbitrage. The reason for this can be found
in Chapter 2. If we look at prices over a very short time interval, we see
more noise, but over the longer period, the trend is dominant. We can then
be arbitraging Dell and HP over 3-day intervals but be long HP and short
Dell for the longer-term trade.
In general, any calculation period under 10 days is targeting market
noise, and those over 30 days are looking for the trend. Macrotrend
strategies typically use trends in the range of 60 to 80 days, but those
periods could be longer rather than shorter. In the previous example we
used a 200-day average to base our technical version of a fundamental, or
value, trade in order to emphasize the trend and minimize noise.
Balancing Fundamentals and Technicals
There is constant debate over which is better, fundamental (or value)
trading or technical analysis. The reality is that both can be good or bad.
With fundamental analysis, you take a long position because the stock is
undervalued, and if it goes down but there is no new information to say that
fundamentals have changed, you simply own the stock at an even better
price. Then the risk of a value trade can be very large, and there is no way
to put a limit on it by using the same fundamental data.
Technical traders have a different problem. Because they may be
following a long-term trend, they could go long Eurodollar interest rates
when the price is 99.75 (a yield of 0.25%). The return is severely limited
because prices can only go to 100, but the risk can be much greater
(understanding that there can also be carry profits). The trend calculation
does not know that yields are at historic lows and that the risk/reward of the
trade is very unattractive. Some traders would call going long simply stupid
and following every system trade naïve.
Why not use the best of both methods? If you have an opinion on the
direction of a stock or futures market, then use the technicals for timing.
For example, if you have decided that the U.S. dollar is going to decline
because of debt and relative Asian economic strength, then you would
want to buy the EURUSD or sell the dollar against the Korean won,
USDKRW. But you would do this only when the trend of USDKRW
signaled a turn down. Then, if you're wrong, the trend will turn up, and you
can exit. As long as you believe the dollar will weaken, you don't go long
but wait for another short signal. This way, you've put a risk management
plan on top of a calculated decision to sell the dollar and buy Asia.
GOLD, PLATINUM, AND SILVER
The relationships between gold, platinum, and silver have been studied for
many decades. The gold/silver ratio was traditionally considered normal at
35:1, but then gold was fixed at $35 per ounce and silver was $1 per
ounce. It was also said that you could buy a pound of meat for an ounce of
silver, but times change. With gold at more than $1,200 per ounce and
silver at reaching new highs of $20 per ounce, the relationship seems to
have broken down and now sits at 64:1. Is it simply adjusting to a new
level, or is it a false concept?
These next comments should be prefaced by saying that everything is
clear after the fact. If you don't like this explanation, you can substitute your
own. You'll find that the financial news commentators, who are indeed very
smart, always sound brilliant when discussing the issues that made the
market go up or down yesterday. But these reasons are only clear
afterward and never seem to be the same. Our problem is to decide on a
profitable position in advance.
Many things have changed, perhaps evolved, during the past 50 years.
With regard to gold and silver, some countries still hold a store of gold to
back their currency, but it is not as formal or as common as in the past. The
value of a currency floats based on the perception of the country's
economic strength, with only a slight help from an above-average holding
of gold reserves. Yet most people still value gold as an internationally
recognized store of value. In addition, the consumption of gold has
increased with new electronic uses. Gold turns out to be very good for
conducting electricity and has been used as a contact point on high-end
circuit boards. Reclaiming that gold is a difficult and highly regulated
process, so much of it is lost.
Some history of gold trading is also necessary to understand the
changes. Gold was fixed at $35 per ounce until the decision at Bretton
Woods on August 15, 1971, to allow gold to float and allow Americans to
own gold. The impact of that decision was that the value of a country's
currency would be determined by its economic strength and not by its store
of precious metals that served to back the currency. Following that
decision, gold moved steadily higher, settling near $150 an ounce.
In 1970, the Hunt brothers decided to corner the market in silver, and by
1979, they had effectively accomplished that goal. From 1979 to 1980,
silver moved from $11 per ounce to $50, peaking in January 1980 before
starting one of the greatest collapses in history. Because of the gold-silver
relationship, gold paralleled the silver move, peaking at about $800 per
ounce and then plunging along with silver. At the peak, the gold:silver ratio
was 16:1, indicating that silver was the driving force.
In the same way investors joined the great tech rally in the 1990s, they
also kept buying gold and silver during the run-up to 1980. The general
public always seems to have the largest position at the worst time. A large
number of companies offered to help investors acquire gold to diversify
and improve their personal portfolios. Even now, with gold above $1,200,
there are firms saying the same thing. When gold and silver collapsed in
1980, investors were badly hurt—not quite as badly as the tech collapse,
because gold and silver have an intrinsic value, but still losses that
exceeded 75%.
Silver, which for investment purposes is considered the poor man's gold,
never recovered. Those investors had long memories. Even gold prices
remained low and very quiet for 20 years, until September 2000. Along
with the decline in the economy that paralleled the tech bubble, people
started buying gold. It is not surprising that investors would choose hard
assets after losing badly in the stock market. But they did not go back to
buying silver. Once seems to have been enough.
For those still considering trading the gold/silver ratio, Figure 5.6 shows
the wide fluctuations and occasional volatile shifts. This is not what we
would consider a tight relationship. There seem to be large intervals where
the ratio trends up or down, making it difficult to put rules in place. Some
traders may think of this as a challenge, but we will look for markets that
are less risky.
FIGURE 5.6 Gold/silver ratio using nearest futures, from August 1983
through August 2009.
THE PLATINUM/GOLD RATIO
Unlike silver, platinum is a precious metal, so the relationship between
gold and platinum should be more stable. However, the uses for platinum
have also changed over the years, with platinum, or platinum group metals,
now the key component in catalytic converters. That increases the
similarity between gold and platinum because both have industrial uses
and both are still a very desirable store of value, but gold remains more
popular as an investment. Figure 5.7 shows gold and platinum continuous
futures prices from 2000. We use continuous futures because we will be
trading futures. There are significant differences in the delivery months,
with gold trading in February, April, June, August, October, and December,
and platinum trading in January, April, July, and October. Even with these
differences, we have no choice but to use the ratio of the nearest delivery.
The main difference will be the carry, or interest rate cost as well as
storage, both based on the number of days until delivery of the contract.
That makes the carry different for both metals except when we trade
October.
FIGURE 5.7 Platinum and gold prices from January 2000 (from continuous
futures). Movement is similar except for the drop in platinum in 2001 and
again in 2008. Gold has been more stable in its rise.
As you can see, prices moved in a very similar pattern most of the time,
with notable exceptions in mid-2001 and the relative collapse of platinum
in mid-2008. Nearly all commodities dropped precipitously in reaction to
the U.S. bailout program and expectations of bad times to come. Because
gold only dropped a much smaller amount in 2008, while platinum reflected
an anticipated drop in consumer spending for jewelry and automobiles, the
platinum/gold ratio collapsed to par.
FIGURE 5.8 The traditional platinum/gold ratio, as well as the
gold/platinum ratio.
Is the platinum/gold ratio any better than the gold/silver ratio? We think
so. Figure 5.8 shows both the platinum/gold ratio and the gold/platinum
ratio. Traditionally, the higher-priced market is divided by the lower-priced
one because values over 1.0 have better resolution and are not limited as
when the ratio approaches zero. The chart shows that the variation in the
platinum/gold ratio is greater. We prefer the gold/platinum ratio because
gold is the primary market, and the difference in the ratios, when used for
systematic trading, will be minimal. Nevertheless, we will include the results
of both gold/platinum and platinum/gold to show that computers don't really
care as long as the numbers have enough decimal places.
The ratios show that, while there are periods where one market gains
over the other, there are also three years when the ratio went sideways.
The highly volatile period beginning in November 2007 will be our biggest
concern. Will spread trading survive the disaster during August and
September of 2008?
Trading the Platinum/Gold Ratio
The platinum/gold ratio is easier to trade than stock pairs because there
only two components: the trend of the ratio and the position sizes. A simple
60-day moving average of the ratio is calculated; then the spread is bought
(long platinum, short gold) when the ratio turns up and sold when it turns
down.
As with pairs trading, the volatility of the two legs must be equalized to
create a position that is not biased toward one of the two legs. Table 5.2
shows a sample of three trades during the second part of 2009. In this
example, platinum is always traded with 10 contracts, and gold is adjusted
higher or lower based on its volatility relative to platinum. The position
sizes are nearly the same for the three trades because the volatility of the
two metals is similar. There are no costs reflected in the profits and losses,
but you could subtract $35 per round turn for each leg to be conservative.
TABLE 5.2 Same platinum/gold trades.

The bigger performance picture is more interesting, as shown in Figure
5.9. During the past 10 years, trading the ratio would have yielded losses
from 2002 through 2006, then extremely good profits. The NAVs for trading
both the platinum/gold ratio and gold/platinum ratio are shown to point out
that, while there are differences along the way, the long-term results are
nearly the same. The statistics show that the profits per contract were
slightly higher using the gold/platinum ratio ($212 versus $194), but the
information ratio was slightly higher using the platinum/gold ratio (0.387
versus 0.383).
FIGURE 5.9 Performance of trading the platinum/gold ratio and the
gold/platinum ratio from 2000.
Using Volatility
It's unrealistic to think that anyone would start trading this ratio in 2000 and
still be trading it at the end of 2006 when the losing streak ended. The
solution to that problem is the same as the one we looked at in Chapter 4
when we found that inflation scares created volatility that improved
performance. There are windows of opportunities that surface during
critical economic times, and those opportunities are best recognized by
watching the volatility. An abnormal increase in volatility generally signals a
stronger correlation between many markets and a potentially profitable
trading period.
The opposite of this, a period of low volatility, is often associated with
listless price movement. The risk may be very low because price
movement is quiet, but that doesn't help if wandering prices do not
generate profits and make it more difficult to offset transaction costs.
In the same way we looked at volatility in the previous chapters, we will
review both the annualized standard deviation and the average true range
as the choices for measuring volatility. Because the annualized standard
deviation uses only the change in closing prices, while the average true
range uses the highs and lows, we have advocated the average true range
as more robust. Figure 5.10 supports that claim.
FIGURE 5.10 Volatility measured using (a) the annualized standard
deviation method and (b) the average true range method.
The annualized volatility shows that platinum is much more volatile than
gold most of the time. From 2000 through 2004, gold remains reasonably
consistent at 10% while platinum bounces from 10% to 40%. We expect
platinum to have a higher volatility when prices are higher than gold, but
this variation does not parallel the ratio between the two metals. To show
that clearly, we divide the annualized volatility by the price and compare the
results in Figure 5.11. The volatilities of the two markets are very close in
the past two years but still varied much more than the volatility measure
using the average true range, shown in Figure 15.10b. It is also interesting
that gold and platinum had the same dollar-value fluctuations throughout
the 10 years using the average true range, but not using the annualized
standard deviation. This seems to be another strong argument for using
the average true range.
FIGURE 5.11 Comparison of gold and platinum annualized volatility as a
percentage of price.
If we focus on Figure 5.10b, we see a clear move to higher volatility at
the beginning of 2006, when the average true range reached about $850. If
we isolate only those trades from the beginning of 2006, we show a return
of 10% per annum at 12% volatility. Because trading these metals using
the ratio should be uncorrelated to any other trading, the 10% volatility will
be leveraged higher when this performance is mixed with others in a
portfolio, a benefit of diversification. The final results of trading the
platinum/gold ratio can be seen in Figure 5.12.
FIGURE 5.12 Performance of platinum/gold from 2006. Even after two
years of sideways returns, a NAV of 170 is equivalent to an annualized
return of 10% at 12% volatility.
Trading the platinum/gold ratio becomes another special situation rather
than an ongoing process. But with markets becoming more complicated
and competition keener, waiting for the right time is more the rule than the
exception.
IMPLIED YIELD
Some commodities are pure carry markets because the forward prices
always reflect the cost of holding that product. That cost is mostly the
interest on the money needed to buy the product, but it may also include
insurance, storage, inspection fees, and additional minor costs. The
easiest case to understand is gold. Each forward month of gold reflects the
basic costs of carry. It always increases, never decreases. This is not the
case with most commodities. Copper is known to trade in backwardation,
where the deferred contracts sell for less than the nearby. This is generally
caused by a combination of falling demand and purchasers (manufacturers
and fabricators) who will wait for the last minute to buy, thereby avoiding
the carrying charges and holding unnecessary inventory. Crude oil is
similar to copper, sometimes going for years in backwardation. We will not
address whether there is any manipulation in these markets because we're
not able to use that information for making trading decisions.
Because forward gold prices always reflect the cost of carry, traders can
keep the term structure in line by arbitraging the various delivery months.
For example, if the current price of gold was $1,000 and the price 12
months forward was $1,050, that would reflect a simple carrying charge of
5%. All things being equal, we would expect the price of the 6-month
forward contract to be $1,025, reflecting a return of 2.5% for half the
period. However, if the 6-month forward was $1,035, then it is too high,
given the 12-month forward. It would imply an annualized yield of 7%, much
higher than the 12-month contract shows. We could buy physical gold, sell
twice as many of the 6-month delivery and buy the 12-month delivery, a
trade called a butterfly (with one foot in the cash market). At some point,
the 6-month and 12-month annualized yields will need to line up. If not, gold
will go to backwardation, which is unheard of. However, the term structure
does not get out of line by enough to produce a profitable trade because
professional arbitrageurs are hovering like vultures for that opportunity.
Table 5.3 shows the forward prices for the electronic Globex and open
outcry sessions for CME gold (previously NYMEX and COMEX
exchanges) and the corresponding forward prices for CME Eurodollar
interest rates. Prices were posted on the CME web site as of March 16,
2010. Some of the calendar months do not have a futures contract;
therefore, for the purpose of this example, the missing yields were
interpolated from the surrounding prices.
TABLE 5.3 Forward delivery prices and implied yields for Eurodollar
interest rates, Globex gold, and open outcry gold.
To the right of Eurodollar prices in Table 5.3 is the annualized yield
implied from the discounted price, which is simply 100 minus the price. As
you would expect, yields increase with time, beginning with the current,
very low yield of 0.31% and increasing to 2.22% if held until December
2011, about 18 months.
Alternatively, you could buy physical gold and sell Dec 11 futures of an
equivalent quantity (each contract is 100 ounces). Then you would be
buying at the spot price of $1,122.50 and hedging by selling short the Dec
11 contract at $1,145.0 for an implied interest rate return of 2.00%. Figure
5.13 shows that the implied yield from both Globex gold futures and open
outcry sessions parallel Eurodollar yields, although somewhat lower.
FIGURE 5.13 Comparison of implied yields from Eurodollars and gold
(Globex and open outcry) as of April 2010.
Why would someone take 2.00% interest out of gold (or less after costs)
rather than the equivalent return in government debt? When you buy U.S.
rather than the equivalent return in government debt? When you buy U.S.
debt, you are subject to variations in the U.S. dollar because when you buy
U.S. interest rates you also buy the U.S. dollar. If you are a European
investor and the EURUSD rises from 1.400 to 1.428, a relatively small
amount in terms of forex fluctuations, you have effectively lost your 2%
return when the money is repatriated back into euros.
Counterparty Risk
Although bank CDs (certificates of deposit) always pay more than
government treasuries, the risk of bank failure became a reality for many
investors in 2008. Although they had considered Lehman Brothers bonds a
AAA investment, their money was backed only by the strength of the
company, which disappeared before anyone could withdraw their funds.
Since then, advertisements for corporate bonds and CDs are followed by
the disclosure “backed by the strength of the institution.”
ETFs have enjoyed tremendous acceptance and liquidity by the public,
but they have various risks that are not well publicized, although probably
appear somewhere in the fine print. Some of these risks include:
Counterparty risk. ETFs are similar to mutual funds in that you
have some direct ownership in the stocks or bonds held in the
ETF. But in many cases, the agency has short-sale repurchase
agreements with other companies who might not be able to fulfill
their end of the arrangement under a worst-case scenario, such
as Lehman Brothers.
Label risk. The shares or futures held in the ETF may not be the
ones that you expect.
Tracking risk. The agency will try to use fewer stocks to duplicate
an index or sector. This might not always work.
Spread risk. Stocks and futures are changed and rebalanced.
These transactions are subject to the cost represented by the
bid-asked spread and tend to be larger when the ETF is larger.
Fees. Although ETFs can be very efficient, there is a fee paid to
the agency that reduces the ETF price, most often applied daily.
If y ou buy an ETF directly from an agency rather than through the
exchange, then you rely entirely on the integrity and financial strength of the
issuing company. When you trade through an exchange, you are
guaranteed delivery of what you buy—that is, the shares are delivered to
you—but the exchange does not guarantee the solvency of the company,
nor does it review its financial statements for potential risk that could
threaten the shareholders. The exchange is simply a vehicle for share
transfer.
A sector ETF is a collection of shares held by the agency issuing the
ETF. For a gold ETF, we have a more complicated problem. If the position
is created using exchange-traded futures, then it is guaranteed, and there
is little risk. If it uses forward contracts (which might be issued by a gold
dealer), then there is no guarantee. For example, if you buy physical gold
(a bar of gold), then you have no risk; however, if you buy a gold certificate
from a bank, you do not own gold, you own the bank's debt, denominated
in gold. This is similar to a bank CD in which you own the bank's debt
denominated in some currency, such as U.S. dollars or euros. A gold ETF
may claim to have physical gold inventoried, but there are no audit
procedures that assure how much gold is held. In addition, if the company
issuing the ETF goes under, it is not clear that the investors in the ETF
have first claim on the gold, if any. This should not be surprising. Even for
stocks listed on the New York Stock Exchange, the exchange itself has no
responsibility for financial misrepresentation, as we saw with Enron.
Exchange-traded futures are guaranteed by an independent clearing
house with enough funds to cover most losses. Excessive losses, which
have never happened, are guaranteed by the members and the value of
their memberships. The exchanges make sure that all traders holding
positions have adequate funds to cover losses, based on a fiscally
conservative expectation of volatility. If there are insufficient funds to cover
these anticipated losses, the trader must deposit additional money within
hours of a margin call, or his or her positions will be liquidated at the
market by the exchange. Extracting implied yields from futures contracts
has less risk than other forms of interest income and has been used more
actively during the past two years by large hedge funds and high-net-worth
investors.
The same distinction needs to be made between exchange-traded
derivatives and over-the-counter derivatives. One is guaranteed, and the
other is not. Most notable are credit default swaps, a vehicle that has been
very actively traded but is attributed with the collapse of the mortgage
market and the Greek economy. Of course, taking a position to profit if
something goes wrong does not cause the collapse, but the publicity of
someone (especially a large hedge fund) profiting from someone else's
misery can bring about countless Senate hearings and threatened
regulation. The biggest issuer of credit default swaps was AIG, and had
the government not bailed it out, it would have defaulted on all of them;
those institutions holding large profits would have lost all their gains, as
well as any money on deposit with AIG.
The lesson to be learned is to be aware of counterparty risk. Don't
assume that everything is fine. In the history of financial risk, other than the
sovereign debt of the major industrialized countries (which is now not quite
as secure as we thought), exchange-traded futures have been the most
secure.
THE YIELD CURVE
Interest rates are the target of many strategies used by investment banks
and hedge funds, so there may not be much room for the armchair trader.
Normally, the areas that are still open for exploitation require longer holding
periods and greater risk. That turns out to be the case with yield-curve
trades, with the added restriction that there are fewer opportunities.
The yield curve is also called the term structure of interest rates. As you
move from shorter maturities to longer—for example, fed funds; 3-month Tbills
or Eurodollars; 1-year bills; 2, 5, and 10-year notes; and finally, 30-
year bonds—the yields form a relatively smooth curve. Based on various
economic events and central bank policy, the curve can steepen (shorterterm
rates move down and/or longer-term rates move up relative to the
other end of the curve) or flatten (shorter-term rates move up and/or longterm
rates move down). During 2009 into 2010, the economy remained
depressed, and continued economic news seemed only to add to the
dismal view of the future, causing the short maturities to go to near zero,
while the long end held steady or began to rise in expectation of better
days and future inflation due to extreme debt. When the view of the
recovery dimmed, longer term rates declined, flattening the curve.
These changes in the yield curve appear to be an opportunity for a
directional profit rather than a mean-reversion approach. Mean reversion
is the source of large commercial profits, mainly the arbitrage of small
abnormalities in the smoothness of the yield curve using various
techniques, including 4-legged spreads (for example, buying the 3-month
maturities, selling the 6-month, buying the 9-month, and selling the 12-
month). However, the profits are very small, and costs must be near zero
for this to be viable. But the risks are also very small.
Noncommercial traders can't compete with the banks using a mean
reversion or stat-arb strategy, but there may be opportunities looking for
shifts in the yield curve that last for a few days. We're going to use a shortterm
moving average applied to the differences between the U.S. 30-year
bond, 10-year note, and 5-year note, three very liquid futures markets.
Trading the Short-Term Trend
The first step is to create the data using continuous, back-adjusted futures.
Because we will be using only a few days of data at a time, it could be
done with individual contracts rather than a continuous series; however,
this gives us the opportunity to conveniently backtest our method.
Being careful that the three data series, the U.S. 30-year bond (US), 10-
year note (TY), and 5-year note (FV), always roll on the exact same day, we
create three series, US-TY, US-FV, and TY-FV. We can't use the ratio
because the back-adjusted prices can become very distorted as you go
further back in their history due to compounding of the price gap on the roll
dates.
Using the difference series, we apply a very short-term moving average
to see what happens. No costs are applied because these may vary
considerably for each trader and for spreads. We will stay aware that the
profits per contract must cover costs and slippage. Results are converted
to NAVs at 12% volatility, our normal benchmark, to make comparisons
easier. Before starting, we test the correlations between the three series of
price differences from the beginning of 2000 through May 2010 and find
that they are very high, reducing our expectations of success.
Series Corr
30yr–5yr 0.872
30yr–10yr 0.939
10yr–5yr 0.961
To make the trading system more responsive, the entry rules are:
If the closing price moves above the moving average, then buy.
If the closing price moves below the moving average, then sell.
Th e results are shown in Table 5.4. There are a large number of trades,
good returns, and good ratios, but the profits per contract are too small for
our costs. An experienced analyst might ask if using a longer calculation
period would increase the size of the profits, but as it turns out, shifts in the
yield curve occur over short periods of time, and longer trends perform
worse. Even in the test of 2, 3, and 4 days, the performance seems to
peak at 3 days, and the profits per contract decline in the 4-day test.
Results generally conform to the correlations, with the TY-FV pair showing
the highest correlations and the smallest unit profits.
TABLE 5.4 Result of trading three yield-curve series using a simple
moving average strategy.
Increasing Unit Profits with a Volatility Filter
It should be no surprise by now that our next step is to introduce a lowvolatility
filter. For this application, it makes even more sense because we
want to only trade when there is a significant change in the yield curve, not
just the odd wiggle. There were a large number of trades, and isolating the
more volatile ones might work.
The volatility filter will be a multiple of the average true range, the same
method we have used before. The period of the calculation will be the
same as the moving average period, also the same technique that has
been used throughout the book. We define the filter,
A trade is only entered if the current day volatility > average volatility
× factor.
The results are shown in Table 5.5, with the volatility factor ranging from
0.50 through 2.00. As we would like to see, there is a clear pattern from
faster to slower moving averages (left to right) and from smaller to larger
filters (top to bottom). The number of trades gets smaller as we go to the
right and down, and the profits per contract get bigger. In the lower right
box, the profits are very good, but there are only 24 trades in 10 years, less
than 3 per year. Because the trades are held for only a few days, we have
a very inactive trading strategy.
TABLE 5.5 Tests of three yield-curve differences using a low-pass
volatility filter.
The best compromise seems to be in the middle, a 3-day moving
average and a volatility factor of 1.5. That gives 118 trades for the 30-5
combination, and profits of $109 per contract. Even with less than 12
trades per year, the returns are 12.8% per annum. The 30-10 combination
has smaller per contract returns but may still be acceptable; however, the
10-5 combination generates only 15 trades over 10 years and is not
interesting. Although we can look at interest rates in other countries, such
as the Eurobund and Eurobobl, the U.S. is the only country with a 30-year
futures contract, and the Eurobund and Eurobobl are similar to the 10- and
5-year U.S. notes, which did not produce large enough profits.
If we look at the pattern of profits in the 30-5 pair, shown in Figure 5.14,
we see that the interval of very low interest rate volatility, from 2005 through
2007, as the equity index markets began their rise, produced no trades.
On the other hand, the subprime crisis during late 2008 was so volatile that
the method was able to capture large, consistent gains. The short interval
at the end again shows no trades, not because of low volatility, but
because of declining volatility, which causes the filter to read positive.
FIGURE 5.14 Results of trading the 30-5 interest rate difference using a 3-
day moving average and a volatility factor of 1.5.
For our purposes, the yield curve spread is another example of an eventdriven
market. When the volatility is high, then large profits are produced
quickly. When volatility is low, there are no trades. From 2000 through most
of 2004, there was a normal market generating small but steady returns.
On its own, this may not seem exciting, but when combined in a portfolio
with many other strategies, it could be excellent diversification.
Skewness in Volatility Filters
One point needs to be discussed before moving on. In Figure 5.14, we had
the case where the volatility filter worked when volatility was rising but not
when it was falling. On the back side of the price rise, in mid-2009,
decreasing volatility caused trades to be skipped, even though the
absolute level of volatility was very high. That situation should be corrected.
One approach is to use an absolute level of volatility; that is, we trade
when the dollar value of volatility, measured by the ATR, is some multiple of
our costs, or above an absolute level of, say, $250.
Another approach is to calculate the volatility over a much longer time
period, perhaps 1, 2, or 3 years, so that a run-up and the following decline
in price lasting three months will all be recognized as high volatility. It might
help to lag the volatility measure by one to three months, so that any surge
in volatility is not included in the current measure. Otherwise, volatility is
always chasing you.
TREND TRADING OF LONDON METAL
EXCHANGE PAIRS
As stated at the beginning of this chapter, there are markets that are
correlated yet do not mean revert; that is, there may be a series of longterm
shifts in the way the public values each company. The first example
was Dell and Hewlett-Packard. This can also happen in commodities
markets. The London Metal Exchange (LME) base metals are all tied
together through the construction industry. The average correlation of all
the LME pair combinations was .45 from 2000 through 2009. In Chapter 4,
we used these relationships to show that the LME pairs could be traded
with a short-term, mean-reversion strategy, but the results were only
marginal. That is, after commissions and slippage, profits were small.
We're now going to look at relative trends in these LME metals.
Consider tin and zinc, which are both noncorrosive metals used in plating
steel. Stainless steel is coated with tin and galvanized steel is coated with
zinc. Tin cans are actually made of a combination of aluminum and steel,
brass is a product of copper and zinc, and bronze is made from copper
and tin. Copper is also the choice for hot-water pipes. Uneven demand for
a specific metal may drive one price more than another, or a problem with
supply may cause one to become more expensive for prolonged intervals.
If this turns out to be true, we can capitalize on the trends while, at the
same time, hedging one against the other to take advantage of their longterm
correlation. By buying one and selling the other, we still maintain a
neutral position with regard to price direction. Both metals could be rising
or falling, and we would be long one and short the other. This type of trade,
a directional spread, offers important diversification in a broad trading
portfolio.
When we looked at price noise in Chapter 2, we concluded that a longterm
view of prices emphasized the trend, while a short-term view
increased the effects of noise. This can be seen by first looking at a daily
chart of the S&P and then converting that to weekly data. The trends will
appear much clearer. Now change the daily chart to an hourly chart, and
you won't be able to see any trends, only noise. In Chapter 4, we used
mean reversion, holding the trade for only a few days. In this chapter, we'll
take a much longer view to give the trend every opportunity to develop.
Creating the Trend Trade
Trends are simple to calculate, and the most popular method is a simple
moving average. We've mentioned before that a typical macrotrend
system, one that attempts to profit from trends that align themselves with
economic fundamentals apply calculation periods from about 40 to 80
days, sometimes longer. It isn't necessary to overcomplicate a trend
strategy. Some have different risk and reward profiles, but all of them
make money when markets are trending and lose when they are going
sideways. For that reason we won't look any further than a moving average
to identify the trend.
There are two choices in the way the data are constructed: the ratio of
prices and the price difference. Because we are using back-adjusted data,
we'll choose the differences. Data begins in 2000 and ends at the end of
2009.
Table 5.6 shows the information ratio from six tests where a moving
average is applied to the series of price differences created from 15 LME
pairs. Table 5.7 shows the corresponding profits per contract for the same
combinations. Results do not reflect any commissions.
TABLE 5.6 The information ratio for six moving average calculation
periods and 15 LME pairs.
TABLE 5.7 Profits per contract for the same tests shown in Table 5.6.
The first thing we notice in the tables is that nearly every test is
profitable. We then believe that there are trends that can be exploited in
the way the metals move in relationship to one another. The average ratios
at the bottom on Table 5.6 show a slight tendency to get larger as the
calculation periods get longer. The highest ratio, 0.462, occurs for
calculation period 40.
Distribution of Tests
Notice that the calculation periods chosen essentially doubled for each
test. Doubling these values is a fast way of getting a good sample over a
wide range of values without many tests. If we were to test every period
from 3 days to 80 days, we would find that the greatest difference in
performance came when we moved from 3 to 4 days, an increase of 1/3,
while the smallest difference was from 79 to 80 days, a change of only
1.3%. If we then averaged the results of all tests, we would be heavily
weighting them toward the long end. By doubling the values, all the
changes are equal at 100%, and we get a much fairer sample.
Pattern of Results
Table 5.7 shows the profits per contract for the same calculation periods
as Table 5.6. The averages show an increase from $4 to $34 per contract.
This is the right pattern when the calculation period increases, but $34 is
not large enough to be comfortably above the cost of trading. If we look
more closely at the results of the individual pairs, we could select five that
might have per contract returns large enough to trade. But we were
expecting more.
Is there anything that can be done? In the past, we have used volatility
filters to select the trades that have a greater chance of larger returns. We
can try to do the same thing here. But first we want to look at a sample of
the NAVs. Figure 5.15 shows the results of four pairs chosen arbitrarily,
lead-tin (PB-SN), aluminum-copper (AL-LP), copper-nickel (LP-NI), and
nickel-lead (NI-PB). They all show that there was very little activity through
2003 followed by low volatility of returns for another two years. From 2005
on, the returns are much more active.
FIGURE 5.15 Sample NAVs for four LME pairs show little activity up to
2005.
TABLE 5.8 Return statistics for LME trend pairs from 2005 through 2009.
If we consider the data beginning in 2005 and see that the markets are
currently performing at a much higher level, we can rerun the 80-day
moving average test from 2005 to get the profits per contract that we can
expect under current market conditions. Table 5.8 shows that the results for
all pairs are far better. The number of trades was reduced by about twothirds,
but those removed were mostly losses because trends between
these pairs do not appear to have been as strong. The average rate of
return of 8.3% and the average ratio of 0.688 would come out much higher
when these pairs are combined into a portfolio and the benefits of
diversification increase leverage. It is also reassuring that every pair was
profitable, and the smallest ratio was for copper-nickel at 0.247.
Remember that these results do not reflect costs, but an average per
contract return of $129 should be enough to retain reasonable profitability.
If you look carefully at Table 5.8 , you will notice that the profits per
contract seem to be inversely related to the correlation between the two
legs of the pair. The largest per contract return was for the copper-tin pair,
$365, which also has a correlation of 0.470 in the total range of 0.403 to
0.729 for all pairs. Figure 5.16 is a scatter diagram of correlations versus
unit profits, showing that correlations over 0.60 have marginal unit returns
and correlations under 0.50 have the highest values.
FIGURE 5.16 Lower correlations generate higher profits per trade for
trending LME pairs after 2005.
We can conclude that the LME nonferrous metals move in a way that can
be exploited using trends where the two legs are volatility adjusted to
equalize risk. But in many of the other situations we've looked at, more
recent price movement, which reflects higher volatility, generated much
better performance. We might have been able to introduce the usual
volatility filter and systematically remove the quiet period before 2005, but
that did not seem necessary because these markets transitioned into a
better trading period. If volatility declines, it would be necessary to stop
trading when returns dropped below costs, but that is not a current
problem.
SUMMARY
Stat-arb trading, which buys and sells abnormal differences in related
markets, profits from prices returning to relative normal. It is a trading
approach that has withstood the test of time and evolved into one aspect of
high-frequency trading. But while we can profit from these distortions in the
short-term, there may be a major shift going on in the long term.
We know that noise dominates price in the very short time frames and
trends surface when we look at the same prices over a long time period.
Up to now we have focused on the short term, but this chapter looked at
the longer term and larger moves that could occur when two fundamentally
related markets diverge. Examples of this were Dell and Hewlett-Packard,
gold and platinum, and the LME nonferrous metals. By going long and
short according to the trend of the price ratios or price differences, and
equalizing the risk of the two legs, we removed the directional risk.
Most of the opportunities in this chapter, and some in previous chapters,
seem to have increased in recent years with the higher volatility associated
with economic crisis and market stress. Perhaps that's the primary
consequence of more competition. Yet, if we continue to scan these
markets, there always seems to be a place that will produce profits.
To implement these strategies, you will need to put this into a
spreadsheet or computer program and verify all the results. You cannot rely
on anyone else's numbers when it's your money that is at risk. You will
need to understand the process, do the calculations, and place the orders
with precision.
We did not look at fixed-income markets in this chapter. Our experience
says that they are too highly correlated. Profits would be very small, and
survival would depend on extremely low transaction costs, the venue of the
professional traders. However, there is a combination of interest rate
markets that will work for us and is discussed in Chapter 7.
The next chapter will introduce a different relative value measurement,
the stress indicator, that will correct some of the problems we faced in
Chapters 3 and 4.
Chapter 6
Cross-Market Trading and the Stress
Indicator
Changing times and improved technology allow more versatile trading
solutions. In this chapter, we look at the stress indicator, which will allow us
to identify buy and sell levels with greater flexibility than the momentum
difference method used in the previous chapters, and we will apply it to
some of the previous pairs. It also gives us the ability to trade across very
different markets, combining physical commodities with stocks that are
highly dependent upon those products.
In previous chapters, we have discussed the classic method of statistical
arbitrage (stat-arb), pairs trading. Pairs trading is based on a strong
fundamental relationship between the stock prices of two companies in the
same business, affected by the same events in similar ways. The
correlations between their price movements may vary from as low as 0.30
to above 0.90. At the low end, there are more opportunities but at greater
risk. At the high end, we need to be selective about which trades are taken
because they track each other so closely that the potential profit might be
too small to overcome costs.
The stat-arb represented by pairs trading has become more difficult.
The method is widely known, even though there are many traders,
especially novices, who do not balance the risks correctly. They can
squeeze out the opportunity for others without profiting themselves.
Because of the small margin of profit in stocks, we also looked at pairs
of U.S. and European index markets, pairs relating to inflation hedges, and
LME metals. Some of these were quite promising; others appeared
successful, but the unit returns were too small to realistically expect a profit.
The method used to trigger signals is called relative value trading.
Using a stochastic indicator, we calculated the value of each leg over the
same time period and then looked to see how often the indicator values
moved far enough apart to offer a profit opportunity. Overall, the results
were good. In this chapter, we introduce a different way of identifying the
trigger points using the stress indicator, which seems to be a more
general and robust way of identifying the buy and sell points when trading
pairs. With this indicator, we look at other interesting trading opportunities.
THE CROSSOVER TRADE
The market is filled with opportunities, and it's up to us to uncover them.
One of these, the most interesting one we'll discuss in this chapter,
crosses over from stocks to commodities.1 There are many brokerage
firms that give access to different investment vehicles, but not as many as
a year ago. The consolidation of the industry in 2008 was followed by a
review of both the profitability and the risk of various divisions, the result
being a narrower focus for some firms, creating a less accommodative
service for clients. Nevertheless, there are still firms, such as Interactive
Brokers, that can facilitate trading across a wide range of markets from a
single investment account.
The first step is to identify a business whose primary input is a
commodity. The obvious ones are the major oil-producing companies,
mining operations, and agribusiness complexes. It's important to avoid
companies that are too diversified because we're looking for a
dependency on the price of the underlying commodity. For example, if the
gold price increases, we want that to be reflected in the share price of
Barrick Gold Corp (ABX). Because we are concerned with company
profits and losses, the airlines might also be candidates for this method,
based on the stock price reaction to the price of crude oil (refined into jet
fuel). However, this may be a temporary situation, complicated by other
economic factors such as a decrease in travelers related to changes in
disposable income or just an increase in fares. As the relationship
between the commodity and the share price becomes less direct, the risk
of the trade will increase. That's not always bad, nor is an opportunity that
lasts for only six months. In Chapter 4, we saw that fear of inflation causes
markets that previously had a loose relationship to move together in a way
that allowed profitable pairs trading.
Trading Hours
It is very important to know that futures and stock prices do not close at the
same time. This was discussed in the Chapter 4, “Pairs Trading Using
Futures.” The main points are:
There will be trading signals that are generated but not tradable
when markets close at different times. If the S&P makes a move
after the close of EuroStoxx, then the stochastic based on
different closes will appear to be different, but the opening of the
EuroStoxx will gap to correct that difference. There is no profit
opportunity. It turns out that the European exchanges have all
aligned their trading times with the U.S. trading hours, so this is
no longer a problem.
For markets such as gold and Barrick Gold, the markets close
at much different times, although the after-hours gold market
continues to trade and can be captured at 4 P.M. when the stock
market closes. For convenience, we will use the commodity
closing price, even though it is a different time. When we studied
the relationship between the U.S. and European index markets
before hours were aligned, we found the results were very
similar. There may be a few false trades due to the difference in
closing times, but we believe the results will be representative of
the performance when prices are posted at the same time.
In real trading, you must capture prices at the same time, while
both markets are open, to assure a correct signal.
Capturing prices at multiple times during the day, especially
following an economic report in either time zone, will increase
the number of signals and the ultimate profitability. For example,
capturing prices at 8:45 A.M. in New York, 15 minutes after the
jobs release, should take advantage of a volatile move in the
U.S. index and interest rate markets, while there is a less certain
reaction in Europe.
We believe that the pair trading concept is sound and will profit
as expected from real distortions in price movement that are
reflected in the momentum calculations.
We will come back to this at different points during our analysis.
THE STRESS INDICATOR
We can think of stress as a rubber band. As we stretch it farther and farther
out of shape, it seems to pull harder to return to normal. In the previous
chapters, we measured our opportunity in pairs trading by calculating two
stochastic indicators, one for each leg of the pair, subtracting the indicator
value for leg 2 from the corresponding value of leg 1 and then found the
threshold levels based on the difference that worked for entries and exits.
The stress indicator goes one step further. When we take the difference
in the stochastic values between leg 1 and leg 2, we then use that series of
values as the input for another stochastic calculation. There are two
advantages to this:
1. There is a single value that varies between 0 and 100.
2. This new value adjusts for volatility in the momentum
difference.
By automatically adjusting the volatility, there will be more trades;
however, we lose the absolute value of the volatility, so we may want to add
a filter that avoids trading when the opportunity is small.
Starting from the beginning, the stress indicator is calculated in the
following four steps:
1. Find the raw stochastic for leg 1 over an n – day period:
This is effectively the position of today's closing price within the
high-low range of the past n – days, measured as a percentage
from the bottom of the range. Note that n – days is the entire n –
day period.
2. Find the raw stochastic for leg 2, using the same n – day
period:
3. Find the difference in the two stochastic values:
Up to this point, we have followed the same process as in the
previous chapters.
4. Find the stress indicator, the stochastic value of the
differences, Diff:
Even though the Diff values do not have highs and lows each day,
the stress indicator can provide added value. There is also no
smoothing involved in this calculation, so there is no lag, as there is in
most trending indicators.
Spreadsheet Example of the Stress Indicator
Calculations
The stress indicator is easily calculated using a spreadsheet. In Table 6.1 ,
there are only four steps needed once the data are loaded. In this example,
we pair crude oil prices (continuous futures) with the Conoco Philips stock
price. The high, low, and closing prices are loaded; the open is not used.
Only 41 days will be used in this example.
TABLE 6.1 Example of stress indicator calculation.

In the two columns with the headings mom1 and mom2, we calculate the
values of the raw stochastic from steps 1 and 2. For example, the 10-day
stochastic, mom1, is written =(D12-min(C3:C12))/(max(B3:B12)-
min(C3:C12)). The same formula is applied to the next three columns in
order to get mom2. Both start in row 12 because it is the first row with 10
previous values. Column J, the mom diff, is simply H12 – I12. The final
column, K, the stress indicator, needs 10 values in column J, so it cannot
start until row 22 on February 12, 2007. It uses column J for the high, low,
and close in the momentum calculation and is written =(J22-
min(J11:J22))/(max(J11:J22)-min(J11:J22)).
The momentum calculations for the first 41 days of data are shown in
Figure 6.1. The first 10 days are omitted because they are needed for
windup. Values of each indicator range from 0 to 100. Up until February
28, the two markets track fairly closely, but then Conoco prices decline
ahead of crude (do they know something?), crude catches up, Conoco
rallies to meet crude, and then crude falls ahead of Conoco. These short
periods where the two markets are out of phase will create the trading
opportunities.
The last step is shown in Figure 6.2, where the difference between the
two momentum indicators is combined into the stress indicator. In this
example, the momentum difference ranges from about –60 to +60 out of a
possible –100 to +100 (–100 when leg 1 is 0 and leg 2 is 100). The stress
indicator has a range from 0 to 100. It reaches these extremes because a
10-day calculation is sensitive to change. That is, a 10-day high will be
recorded as 100 and a 10-day low as 0. Those values occur much more
often with a 10-day calculation than they would with a 30-day calculation.
FIGURE 6.1 Starting stochastic momentum calculations for crude oil and
Conoco Philips.
FIGURE 6.2 Momentum difference and the stress indicator.
Rules for Trading Using the Stress Indicator
The trading rules for the stress indicator are very similar to the momentum
difference that we used previously. There are still two primary variables,
the calculation period and the buying/selling thresholds. We always use
symmetrical thresholds, even though some analysts argue that certain
markets, such as equity indices, are biased to the upside. We want to give
the longs and shorts an equal chance to profit. We could still have an exit
threshold, which is nominally set at 50, but could be 55 or 60 for shorts and
45 or 40 for longs.
The main difference between the methods is that the stress indicator will
find a relative peak or valley in the price movement that cannot be found
using the previous method.
If the indicator is robust, then moving the threshold from 90 to 95 should
reduce the number of trades and increase the size of the profits per trade,
or unit profits. In the same way, holding the threshold constant at, say, 95,
and increasing the calculation period from 10 to 20 should also reduce the
number of trades and increase the size of the unit profits. When the
threshold is very low, for example, 70, the unit profits are likely to be too
small to overcome transaction costs, even though it will vary based on the
volatility of the two legs. Even if there are sufficient profits, there will be
many times when you enter based on a 70 threshold and prices continue in
the same direction, pushing the indicator value to 90. That represents a
sizable risk, even if the final accounting is a profit.
There are also reasons to use exit thresholds, but we have chosen not to
use them. Actually, that is not a fair statement. When you exit at a value of
50, you are expecting the two legs to both come back to their relative
midpoint price based on the calculation period. That is as much a positive
decision as saying that we exit when the short position (entered at a stress
value of 90) moves to 60 (not quite neutral) or that the short moves to 40,
slightly better than neutral. Some traders would like to take as much as
possible from a trade by entering a short at +90 and exiting at +10, the
point where you would reverse to long. When you use a short calculation
period, the indicator will swing from high to low, yet the market has no
obligation to do that. If you get caught selling into a strong market, then the
chances of exiting at an indicator value of +50 are far greater than exiting
at +10. Risks that are very large but occur infrequently are extremely
important to your final success. We can now look at some market
examples.
GOLD, COPPER, AND PLATINUM
We start by applying the stress indicator to mining stocks. With gold in the
news, the higher prices and volatility are likely to cause mining stocks to
move in tandem with the underlying metal. This relationship may be
increased because some investors choose to buy a portfolio of gold
mining shares rather than the metal itself.
Fundamentally, we would expect a gold mining company to show
increased profits when the price of gold goes up. From one day to the next,
their cost of mining and fabrication doesn't change as the price of gold
changes, so better gold prices should translate into higher company
profits. Along with gold, we will look at companies that mine copper and
platinum. In that way, we can see if the stress indicator works across a
wider range of markets and stocks, rather than just gold.
We can use the Internet to look up those companies that specialize in
particular metals, but some of them produce more than one in large
quantities. One web site, www.miningnerd.com, gives you a choice of both
metals and companies in many countries. We could also find what we
wanted on www.yahoo.com. We were able to sort by capitalization and
select the largest companies to include in our test.
A well-diversified company will not perform as well as one highly focused
on mining one metal. Even so, we won't try to analyze the fundamentals of
the company but assume that successful trading means that the metal is of
primary importance to the company share price. One of the uncertainties of
trading stocks is that, even though a company is dependent on gold or
copper, it may be that management, labor and trade contracts, or mining
operations overwhelm the impact of gold prices.
Trading Rules
Our test will cover both metals prices and share prices beginning in
January 2000, a little over 10 years. We gave the trading rules in the
previous section, but briefly:
The stress indicator takes the metal price as leg 1 and the stock
price as leg 2.
The stress indicator will use a 10-day calculation period.
We sell the metal and buy the company shares when the stress
indicator moves over 95.
We buy the metal and sell the shares short when the stress
indicator falls below 5.
We volatility adjust the position sizes of both legs in order to
have the same risk.
We exit both longs and shorts when the stress indicator crosses
50.
The Dynamics of Changing Parameters
The parameters used, the 10-day calculation period and the thresholds for
entering and exiting, are basic values and not fitted to the best solution.
Varying the short entry threshold above and below 95 should result in fewer
or more trades in a predictable pattern. For example, moving the threshold
from 95 to 98 might cut the number of trades by 20% but increase the unit
profits (per contract and per share). Similarly, lowering the threshold would
increase the number of trades but lower the unit profits; it should also
increase the overall trading risk because trades would be entered earlier
and held through more variation in price movement. Lowering the threshold
will, at some point, cause the unit profits to fall below the transaction costs.
Changing the exit threshold has a similar dynamic. For shorts entered at
95, exiting at 50 is considered a neutral point, where both legs come back
into equilibrium. If we raise the exit point to 55, we reduce the unit returns
by exiting sooner, and we may increase the number of trades by a small
amount. If the value of the stress indicator falls to 53, allowing an exit, then
moves back up to 96, we get another trade. The chances of that happening
are smaller when the calculation period is shorter because the stress
indicator value will move quickly and has less definition.
The biggest changes to performance come when the calculation period
is changed. By shortening the period below 10, the stress indicator will
move between 100 and 0 faster, more trades will be generated, and unit
returns will be smaller. Increasing the calculation period will do the
opposite. But there is another dynamic affecting results—price noise.
Pairs trading is mean reverting; therefore, markets with more noise
produce better results. Entering a short on a sudden jump up in gold that
has no follow-through is exactly the pattern for profitability. In Chapter 2, we
discussed how to measure noise and also that viewing prices over a
shorter time period magnified the noise, while longer periods emphasize
the trend. Then shorter calculation periods will be better for pairs trading. If
we were to use a 60-day period to generate the stress indicator, then we
might see only a few buy or sell signals each year and hold that trade for
weeks before exiting. We would be fighting the trend, usually
unsuccessfully.
This all explains why this chapter looks at trading in a variety of
commodities and stocks, all with the same parameters. If you choose to
use this method, you should prove to yourself that varying the parameters
has a predictable effect on results, and that most choices of parameters
will be profitable. A high percentage of profitable results across markets
means that you have a robust trading method.
Remember that the stress indicator has no notion of volatility. All peaks
and valleys are relative to recent price swings. If prices are quiet for 10
days, the stress indicator will adjust the buy and sell zones to a narrower
range. Part of this process will be to apply a volatility filter, a common
solution that seems to work well.
Costs
In the previous chapters, no costs have been applied to the results based
on stocks, but $25 per round turn was used for futures. Per share returns in
stocks were shown so that you could decide if the fees that you pay allow
net profits after costs. In this chapter, we use commodities for one leg, and
the cost for buying or selling a contract is larger and could change the
outcome; therefore, we will charge the commodity leg $25 for each round
turn. We assume stocks can be traded for less than 1 cent per share;
therefore, no cost is used for the stock side of the trade.
Slippage in trading commodities can be larger than the commission
costs if you throw your order into the market as a stop or a market order.
Most professional traders use limit orders; that is, if they want to sell gold
at $1,105.50, where the market is currently trading, they place an order to
“sell 10 gold 1106,” looking to do slightly better. If the order is not filled in a
few minutes, they can lower that order to “sell 10 gold 1105.50 or 1105.”
Some amount of patience is usually rewarded with a good fill. For that
reason, and because of trading experience using systematic methods, we
have chosen to use $25 for each commodity trade. For some
professionals, this cost can be near zero. For the novice, it might be $100.
MINING COMPANIES
The following eight mining companies were selected, mostly by
capitalization, but also for the convenience of getting the data:
Symbol Company Dependency
ABX Barrick Gold Gold
NEM Newmont Mining Gold
GG Gold Corp Gold
IAG IAMGOLD Gold
BVN Compania de Minas Buenaventura Gold
FCX Freeport McMoRan Copper (and gold)
RTP Rio Tinto Copper
SWC Stillwater Mining Corp Platinum
The pattern of metals prices can be seen in Figure 6.3, beginning in
1983. Older prices are not the actual cash price at the time because these
are back-adjusted futures prices; however, the patterns are the same. Gold
declined from its cash peak of $800 per ounce in January 1980 and kept
dropping throughout the 1980s and 1990s. Anyone holding gold from the
bull market of 1979 would not have recovered their investment until 2003,
without including the lost interest income or adjustments due to inflation.
Because of that steady decline and the associated low volatility of prices, it
would have been difficult to trade gold using any strategy and net a profit
(other than holding a short position for 20 years).
FIGURE 6.3 Prices of gold, copper, and platinum from 1983, backadjusted
nearest futures.
Instead, we'll look at the more recent periods, first from the beginning of
2000 and then starting from 2007. It's important that the strategy is
successful even during less volatile periods, but more interesting if we
focus on the last few years, when inflation has been a concern of investors
and volatility has increased. Figure 6.4 shows that although both precious
metals and nonferrous metals have received a lot of press coverage during
the past few years, prices for the three metals were stable from January
2006 through mid-2007. All three rallied in the first quarter of 2008, but
gold was the only metal to recover; copper and platinum are now trading
below their highs. The similarity in patterns, given the very different
fundamentals, indicates a global market issue, in this case inflation and the
change in the dollar, was driving prices. Investors, concerned about the
loss of purchasing power, choose hard commodities and put their money
into commodity funds containing all three metals, among others such as
crude oil and wheat. By using a short calculation period, pairs trading
should be able to focus on short-term market noise and distinguish
between these markets, at the same time gaining valuable diversification.
FIGURE 6.4 Prices of gold, copper, and platinum prices from 2006
through March 2010.
The Test
The cross-market strategy was run on the eight share prices and their
metal dependencies beginning in January 2000, with a 10-day calculation
period, 95 short entry, 50 exit, and a $25 cost per contract for commodity
trades. Results are shown in Table 6.2.
TABLE 6.2 Results of cross-market mining tests from 2000.
Overall results are remarkably good, with an average information ratio
above 1.0 and an annualized return of 12.5% at an annualized volatility of
12%. The gold-copper-platinum leg averaged $114 per contract after a
charge of $25, but the per share return was a marginal 5.9 cents. A few of
the companies, Newmont, Barrick, and Rio Tinto, had returns that were
reasonably high, but it would be much better to get the returns per share
higher.
There are two ways to solve this problem:
1. Find a time period when volatility was higher.
2. Filter those trades entered when volatility was relatively low.
The more recent years, from 2007, would satisfy the first option, but if
volatility were to fall, we might not have a trade for months or years at a
time. By applying a volatility filter that varies with price, we gain some
flexibility. Even during extended periods where volatility is low, there are
bursts of activity that could produce profitable returns.
TABLE 6.3 Results of cross-market mining tests from 2007.
FIGURE 6.5 Cumulative profits for mining companies from 2007.
In pursuing the first option, Figure 6.4 shows that the period from 2007
had higher volatility. Table 6.3 shows the results of using our basic
parameters and costs applied to that trading interval. Because the interval
was slightly over 30% of the first period, we expect the number of trades to
drop proportionally. Instead of 529 trades, there are now 178, 33.6% of the
original, close to expectations. The higher volatility apparent from the chart
translated into much better annualized returns, 23.0% compared with
12.5%. The information ratio also jumped from 1.04 to 1.92, a very large
increase, indicating that this trading period yielded higher returns for the
same risk. Most important, the profits per unit traded (contracts and
shares) increased significantly. The metals returned $263 per contract, up
more than 100%; the stocks increased to 8.7 cents per share from 5.9
cents.
One interesting result is that Rio Tinto and Stillwater show losses on the
stock side of the trade but ratios near 1.0. That happens when the number
of contracts times the unit metal returns is greater than the number of
shares times the unit share return. The returns of the commodity metals leg
overwhelms the losses of the stock. Returns per share of Barrick,
Newmont, and Buenaventura exceeded 23 cents, a very safe margin of
profit. Figure 6.5 shows the cumulative profits for each pair from 2007. At
the top are gold trading against Barrick (ABX) and Newmont, and platinum
with Stillwater. Platinum shows more volatility in returns during 2008 than
any of the other pairs during the entire period.
The overall impression that you get from the results in Figure 6.5 is that
mining pairs work and continue to generate good returns. Copper pairs
post the lowest returns but would help diversification when this is viewed
as a portfolio.
Filtering Volatility
Using the average true range for measuring volatility over the same period
as the stress indicator, we can filter out trades entered during periods of
low volatility. This may not be necessary because the results from 2007
were very good. Still, trading less often reduces your exposure to price
shocks and risk in general. If you can achieve the same return by being in
the market less often, you are always safer.
Higher volatility improves the performance of most arbitrage strategies.
It allows the entry spreads to be larger; therefore, costs become a smaller
factor. Using a momentum indicator, such as the stochastic or stress,
results in self-adjusting entry thresholds because the concept of high and
low is relative to recent price movement. It is not necessary to change
anything in the strategy to account for increases in volatility. In addition, the
number of shares traded for each commodity futures contract will vary as
the two markets change in volatility relative to one another. Of course, risk
increases with volatility, but the position sizes will drop to maintain a
constant risk level.
Decreasing volatility is another matter. As volatility drops below some
very low level, the average profit from a trade will not be enough to offset
costs. Before 2006, volatility greatly reduced the rate of return. We can see
this by netting the values in Tables 6.2 and 6.3. The returns from 2007
were twice the returns over the entire period from 2000, which means that
the returns from 2000 through 2006 must have been very small.
In Figure 6.6, the volatility of gold and Newmont Mining are parallel at
low levels from 2000 through the third quarter of 2005. Volatility is
measured as the average true range of prices over the past 10 days, the
same period as the stress calculation. By reading the chart, we can
estimate that volatility less than $500 per day in gold and $1.50 per share
in Newmont is too low to trade.
FIGURE 6.6 Comparison of gold and Newmont Mining volatility, January
2000 through February 2009.
Results Using a Volatility Filter
When we apply the volatility filter, we use a multiplication factor to raise the
threshold to a reasonable level. Without that, the use of 1 average true
range would eliminate half the trades. To generalize the use of the volatility
filter and avoid overfitting, we use the same multiplication factor for all
markets, where the average true range of the price moves is converted to
a percentage, ATR%, as follows:
For stocks,
where the ATR is calculated over 10 days, the conversion factor is 1.0
indicating 1 share minimum, and St is today's stock price. The value is
multiplied by 100 to get a whole percent.
For futures,
the only difference is that the conversion is the value that gives you the
profit or loss based on a big point move. For example, one contract of
gold is 100 troy ounces; then the conversion or big point value is 100.
By using a factor and converting the current ATR to a percentage,
ATR%, we are able to use the same values for each pair. We will use only
the filter factor of 3.0, which means that we will enter a trade only if the
current volatility is greater than 3%, as measured previously. In our rules,
both the metal prices and the share prices must have a volatility below 3%
to filter the trade. In other words, if either the metal or the share price
shows a volatility greater than 3%, we take the trade. If both markets have
low volatility, the chance is greater that the overall market is quiet and we
are not just seeing a small interval of low activity in the metal or the stock.
Filtered Results
Table 6.4 shows the results of the mining pairs from 2007, applying the
volatility filter with a factor of 3.0. Even though the volatility was higher
during the last 3 years, we want to remove lower-volatility trades that would
have generated smaller unit profits.
TABLE 6.4 Mining pairs from 2000 with volatility filter of 3.0.
Results are similar to those without the filter, but unit returns for shares
increased significantly from 8.7 cents to 13.2 cents. The two pairs, copper-
RTP and platinum-SWC, still show losses on the stock side, but their ratios
increased slightly. Overall, the information ratio was the same, but the
results are more uniform. The average returns for each metals contract
remained almost the same, but those values are large enough to net a
realistic profit. Figure 6.7 shows the cumulative profits of the eight pairs.
FIGURE 6.7 Cumulative profits from mining pairs from 2007, using a
volatility filter.
Alternative Rules
The cross-market strategy as discussed in this section had very little
testing. Only a 10-day calculation period was used, and only the 95 short
entry and 5 long entry thresholds were tested. We consider the exit at 50 a
nonchoice. Essentially, we used a basic set of values applied to all new
markets with good success.
You can increase the size of each profit, and also the risk, by waiting
until the stress indicator reaches 45 for shorts and 55 for longs, but there
will be fewer trades. More trades can be generated by narrowing the entry
thresholds to 90 and 10 or 85 and 15, but you reduce the potential profits.
Once a trade is entered, the exit zone could be closer—for example, 55
instead of 50 for shorts—to capture more profits, but those profits will be
smaller, and it will be more difficult to overcome transaction costs. You can
decide to exit the trade if it's not profitable after 3 or 5 days, but that will
reduce the percentage of profitable trades and turn some of the profits into
losses. Using any stop or exit rule intended to cut losses also puts severe
restrictions on the profits. It will require that prices move within a narrow
range to satisfy the risk constraints. Markets don't like to do that and seem
to know when you've placed a stop so that it can be touched before
reversing back in the direction that would have posted a profit.
Mean-reverting strategies require a high percentage of profitable trades
to succeed because the few losses can often be quite large. That is a
natural pattern in trading. There is no free lunch. Trend-following systems
have a large number of losing trades, but a few exceptional gains, called
the fat tail, make up for all the losses. Mean-reverting methods are the
opposite. They have a high percentage of smaller, profitable trades and a
few much larger losses. There is no way to change these patterns. If you
add a filter that seems to beat the odds, chances are you've overfit the
data, and it won't work in real trading. You may even succeed for some
time, as did Long-Term Capital, but in the end, the risk is still there.
Volume
Volume can be a simple substitute for volatility or an additional measure
that adds stability. When volume increases, so does the opportunity for
volatility. Volume can be considered potential volatility. In Figure 6.8, the
volume of gold is the total volume of all futures contracts, and the volatility is
the 10-day average true range. Volume can be erratic and is normally
smoothed to see if it's in an uptrend or a downtrend, but the shapes of the
two curves are very similar. Volume seems to lead volatility as it moves
higher in 2002, it has only a minor setback compared with volatility in
2005, and it clearly starts to decline well ahead of volatility at the end of
2008.
FIGURE 6.8 Comparison of gold volatility and volume.
For those familiar with futures, open interest is also a good measure.
Open interest is the number of outstanding contracts. As public interest in
a market grows, such as gold during a declining U.S. dollar period,
investors enter the futures market by buying a gold contract. They are
matched with someone who wants to sell a contract at the same price. If
this is a new transaction, it adds one contract of open interest. If the new
buyer gets the contract from a person who previously owned a contract of
gold, then there is no change in open interest. During inflation periods,
there are always more people wanting to buy gold. Investors currently
holding gold are not interested in selling. The short-term trader, who
believes that gold prices will drop slightly over the next few minutes or
hours, will accommodate the new investor by selling a contract of gold,
intending to get out of that trade before the end of the day by buying it
back.
Open interest is said to have a pattern that confirms the trend. That is,
when large numbers of investors are buying gold, then open interest rises.
When gold prices suddenly turn to the downside, those investors liquidate
their positions en masse, causing open interest to drop. Analysts should
consider using open interest as an alternative to volume.
AGRIBUSINESS PAIRS
Agribusiness companies are another group of stocks that are dependent
on commodities. These include Archer Daniels Midland (ADM), the
biggest public company that crushes soybeans (A. E. Staley and Cargill
are both privately held); Purina (part of Nestlé), which uses grain for dog
food; Oscar Mayer (now a division of Kraft) and Swift, which processes
mainly poultry; ConAgra, which provides diversified food services; and a
score of other companies. Although ADM is quite diversified, it is still
highly focused on grain.
Taking soybeans as the dependent commodity, we pair it with ADM and
apply the same parameters as mining, beginning in 2000 through March
2010. The first line of Table 6.5 shows the results using these same basic
parameters. Results are good, but the returns per contract and per share
are marginal, even after deducting $25 for each contract of soybeans
traded.
TABLE 6.5 Soybean-ADM pair using the standard parameters, with and
without a volatility filter.
FIGURE 6.9 The soybean-ADM pair from 2000, with and without a
volatility filter.
This problem can be overcome by applying the same filter that we used
for mining, a 10-day ATR with a factor of 3.0. Results then improved
everywhere, while the number of trades dropped by about 40%. The ratio
improved nicely, as did the annualized returns. Most important, the unit
returns for soybeans rose to $122 per contact, and the ADM returns to 10
cents per share. The cumulative profits for both the nonfiltered and filtered
cases are shown in Figure 6.9. The two return streams are nearly parallel,
but the filtered stream has intervals when it was out of the market. These
can be seen as horizontal lines on the chart. The trades that were
eliminated netted a total return of near zero, which can be seen in Table
6.5, because the TotPL is almost the same, even though the number of
filtered trades declined substantially. Fewer trades with the same profits
will result in higher unit returns, just what we were trying to achieve.
Although we tested only one stock, the result was similar to our mining
results. This adds substance to the robustness of the concept.
THE MAJOR ENERGY PRODUCERS
No cross-market trading method could be complete without looking at
energy. In Chapter 3, the pairs were made up only of various major energy
companies. Now we'll look at whether the price of crude oil directly affects
the share prices of those companies.
We also looked at the increased correlation in certain inflation products,
gold, crude oil, and the EURUSD, beginning in 2007. We would expect the
relationship between crude oil and the oil companies to increase similarly.
We make no attempt to find out how much of their profit margins are
dependent on the price of crude because these companies have large
downstream operations (refining and retail), as well as exploration and
production, or upstream operations. We expect that a significant increase
in the price of crude oil will go right to the company's bottom line because
there are no costs added to their operations when prices rise.
Of these players, the first pair will be ExxonMobil (XOM) and the crude
oil futures contract traded on the New York Mercantile Ex-change
(NYMEX), now part of the Chicago Mercantile Exchange (CME). Because
ExxonMobil is a very large, diverse company, factors other than the price
of crude oil will move its share price; therefore, it shouldn't be surprising if
an arbitrage with crude is not reliable in a normal market. But with the price
of crude moving from $50 to $150 per barrel and back to $30, this market
is far from normal. If there was ever a time that Exxon profits would track
crude prices, this is it.
I n Figure 6.10, we can see that crude oil and XOM prices track
reasonably well until the last quarter of 2006. Crude prices take a sharp
drop from about $120/bbl (these are back-adjusted futures) to near $80,
while XOM continues higher. Then, when crude prices spike in mid-2008,
XOM prices have already started lower. It's not clear from this chart that an
arbitrage between the two will be consistent, if at all profitable, from the last
quarter of 2006; however, they come back together at the end of 2008 and
again seem to be tracking closely.
FIGURE 6.10 Crude oil and ExxonMobil prices, January 2000 through
March 2010.
One point to keep in mind is that our trades are held for only a short
time. Although we see the big trends in the chart, pairs trading holds
positions only a few days, capitalizing on the noise. When using a meanreverting
system, such as pairs trading, holding a trade for a long time
would be a disaster when there are sustained moves in opposite
directions. Fortunately, when you view prices in the short term, there is a lot
of noise.
Relative Value
It would not be easy to find an absolute price level where a stock and a
commodity price are both distorted or both normal. Even if there was one
point where they appeared to be in equilibrium, everything would change
as prices changed. An economist might be able to draw a supply-demand
curve to explain the relationship, but econometric analysis has not been
particularly dependable and has a time horizon that is far longer than any
trader would care to think about. The empirical approach is a much more
satisfying and rewarding way to solve this problem.
Stress Indicator for Crude-ExxonMobil
The risk of trading crude against XOM is going to be high because both
markets have been very volatile. If we were more demanding with our entry
points and faster to exit, we should expect to reduce that risk, even though
it would also reduce the size of our individual profits. Up to this point, we
have only used a 10-day momentum and entered shorts at a 95 threshold
and longs at 5. Exits are only when the stress indicator crosses 50. We will
continue to use exactly those parameters and rules because success adds
to the robustness of the method, and that's important for longevity.
A $25 round-turn cost per contract will be deducted from each crude
trade to be more realistic about results. Although you could deduct your
own costs from the unit returns, the information ratio would be highly
inflated if costs were omitted. Still, with stock costs less than 1 cent per
share, we have not subtracted any costs on the stock side.
Results trading the crude-XOM pair are shown in Table 6.6. Two periods
are compared, 2000 through March 2010 and 2007 through March 2010.
When we looked at inflation pairs, for example, gold and the EURUSD, we
found that correlations increased, volatility increased, and per unit returns
increased when we selected periods when there was more investor
activity. The results in Table 6.6 confirm that same expectation. Over the
entire 10-year period, results were good. There were a reasonable number
of trades, 352, or about 35 per year, with annualized returns of 14.5% and
a good information ratio of 1.21. Also important are the unit returns, which
indicate the method's sensitivity to slippage and costs. Crude returned
about $309 per contract net of a $25 cost, and ExxonMobil returned 31.1
cents per share (results are shown as 100 shares). Both are well within our
requirements for trading. However, this pair may not be representative of
other energy sector pairs, and keeping per unit returns high is an important
target of system development.
TABLE 6.6 Results of trading the crude-XOM pair for two different time
periods.
FIGURE 6.11 Cumulative profits from the crude-XOM pair using a
calculation period of 10 days and entry threshold (for shorts) of 95.
The second line of Table 6.6 covers only the period from January 2007
through March 2010. The number of trades drops by 66% to 118, but the
unit returns for crude jump to $948, more than three times the original
$309. Profits per share of XOM also increase by 71%, a healthy amount.
The information ratio increases to an impressive 2.33. Keep in mind that
this period from 2007 to now was selected with hindsight. Because we are
in a more volatile market, this could be traded now, but it will eventually
revert to the normal volatility. It simply points out that you can be more
aggressive about taking positions when the market is more active. After
we finish looking at the detail of the trades, we will try to simplify the
selection of trades using a volatility filter. Meanwhile, Figure 6.11 shows
the cumulative PL for the crude-XOM pair beginning January 2000. Profits
didn't begin until 2005; then they increased rapidly. From late 2008, there
has been some moderation in the rate of increase, but it remains
profitable.
Trade Detail
Before looking at a broader selection of markets, it would be useful to
review the numbers associated with a specific trade. Table 6.7 gives a
complete profile of all the calculation results needed to make a trade.
Table 6.7 a has the data, the stress indicator calculations used for entry
and exit signals, and the volatility calculations needed to determine the
position size. Table 6.7 b shows all of the positions, as well as the profit
position size. Table 6.7 b shows all of the positions, as well as the profit
and loss calculations.
TABLE 6.7 Crude-XOM pairs trades.

Table 6.7 a begins with the date and then the high, low, and closing
prices for crude oil (nearest futures) followed by the high, low, and close for
ExxonMobil. The high and low are used for both the initial momentum
calculations and the volatility, which, in turn, is used to decide the position
sizes. Trades are entered on the close, so the open is not needed here.
We said earlier that the markets do not close at the same time, but if you
enter prices ahead of the crude close, you can trade both markets at that
time. Experience shows that signals occurring anytime during the day
should produce a good return.
The next two columns show the raw stochastic momentum calculations
for crude and XOM. These values range from 0 to 100, as prices go from
oversold to overbought. The calculation was shown earlier in this chapter,
and it is the same calculation that was used in Chapter 3. All momentum
values change quickly because only 10 days are used in the calculation.
Column 10, M1 – M2, is the momentum difference, which becomes the
input to the stress indicator, given in the next column. Although the
momentum difference can range from −100 to +100, the stress indicator
resets those values to the range 0 to +100. This is the column used to
determine a short entry (greater than 95), a long entry (less than 5), and an
exit (crossing over 50).
The last two columns are the volatility calculated using the average true
range and expressed in dollars. You'll notice that the stocks are based on
trades of 100 shares, so when we see the results, it will show unit profits in
whole cents rather than in dollars (i.e., a 12 cent unit profit will be shown as
12.00 rather than 0.12).
The first trade shown is a long (long crude, short XOM) taken on the
close of December 3, 2008, when the stress indicator drops from 15.14 to
0. That happens when today's low is the lowest of the past 10 days. The
entry prices are the close of trading in each market. The position size is
always 10 contracts for crude and the number of shares in XOM needed to
make the ATR equal for both legs. Remember that we are using stock
units of 100, so a position size of –93 is actually short 9,300 shares. We
get those shares by dividing the volatility of crude, $4,243, by the volatility
of 100 shares of XOM, $458.30, for a position size of 9.258 for each
contract of crude. We trade 10 contracts; therefore, the XOM position is 93
(100 share units) or 9,300 shares.
Following the profits and losses for the trade is straightforward. Crude
was entered at 75.51 per barrel and XOM at 76.85 per share. The stress
indicator rises steadily until on December 9, 2008, it reaches the value
55.24, above the exit threshold of 50, triggering an exit on the close. The
exit price for crude is 70.79 for a net loss of 10 contracts × (70.79 – 75.51)
× 1,000 per big point for a loss of $47,200 less $25 per contract for a net
loss of $47,450. XOM was sold short at 76.85 and bought back at 76.12
giving a profit of 9,300 × (76.85 – 76.12), or $6,789. That nets to a loss on
the pairs trade of $40,661. Well, not every trade can be a profit.
On the next trade, the stress indicator jumps to 100 on December 11,
2008, and we sell 10 crude at 76.70 and buy 11,400 shares of XOM at
77.94. On December 16, the indicator value drops to 37.16, and the trade
exits at 72.56 for crude and 81.06 for XOM. In this trade, we were short
crude for more than a $5 profit and long XOM for more than a $3 profit.
The total return on the pairs trade was $76,758.
FIGURE 6.12 XOM (top panel), crude oil (middle panel), and the stress
indicator (bottom panel), along with the momentum indicators for the two
legs. © 2001–2008 TradeStation Technologies, Inc. All rights reserved.
Visualizing the Pairs Trade
It is always a good check of your work to see the trading signals on a
screen. Many careless errors are avoided that way. You can plot the stress
indicator, the individual momentum indicators for the two legs, and the
corresponding buy and sell points for the trade. Figure 6.12 is a Trade
Station Securities chart with the signals given in the top panel along with
prices for XOM. Crude oil prices are in the second panel, and the
indicators at the bottom. TradeStation is a good candidate for
programming this indicator and generating live signals or end-of-day
signals. Table 6.2 showed some of the trading signals that appear in
Figure 6.6. For each trade, there is only one crude contract traded, and the
XOM shares represent the number needed to volatility-adjust the two legs.
A Reminder about Trading Hours
When trading two very different markets, you will find that they often do not
close at the same time, although they are both open at the same time for
many hours. The crude oil market closes in New York at 2:30 P.M. each
day, while the stock market is open until 4:00 P.M. Crude continues to
trade in the after-hours market and can be traded 24 hours, although
volume is much thinner throughout the evening and night.
The prices used in these examples are captured at two different times. If
you wait until after the stock market closes, then calculate the values, you
will be using the same prices. But then you would need to trade stocks and
crude at about 4:30 P.M. That's not too bad for stocks, but you may start to
see low volume for crude.
A professional systematic trader will capture both crude and stock
prices shortly before the close of the stock market, run the numbers, then
trade on or near the close of the stock market, when most other markets
are still reasonably active. For these pairs trades, the best approach is to
capture prices before the crude close, when both crude and the stock
market are open and trading actively. And it is more likely that a distortion
will occur intraday than based on the closing prices. It doesn't matter what
time of day you calculate the stress indicator and generate a signal. If
prices are distorted at 11 A.M. or at 1 P.M., and the stress indicator is
above 95 or below 5, then the timing is good for a trade.
Tracking the Trades
While entries must be executed promptly, exits are not as critical. We enter
the trade when the distortion is unusual (and therefore less frequent), but
there are many more opportunities to exit when prices return to normal, the
most common situation. However, during volatile markets, which have
become more frequent, exiting the first time the price moves back to
equilibrium (a stress indicator value of 50) removes unnecessary risk.
Other Petroleum Companies
While the crude-XOM pair has shown very good performance during the
past three years, it is even more important that the exact same strategy
works for other petroleum companies. There is no doubt that companies in
the same business will show high price correlation to one another;
therefore, if this method doesn't work for other petroleum companies, we
can say that we overfit the data. We have already applied this method to
mining and one agribusiness company with exactly the same rules, so we
have hopeful expectations.
Table 6.8 shows the results applied to nine major petroleum companies
listed on the NYSE, with ExxonMobil repeated at the top. These
companies were chosen simply because of their capitalization and the
availability of data. They are:
XOM ExxonMobil
SUN Sun
VLO Valero
EP El Paso
COP ConocoPhillips
MRO Marathon Oil
APA Apache
APC Anadarko
CVX Chevron
On the left are the results from January 2000 through March 2010, and
on the right from January 2007 through March 2010. First, we can see that
the results are uniformly profitable and consistent with expectations. None
of the pairs lost money, and only El Paso had a losing stock market leg.
During the most recent three years, there were about 35 trades per pair
per year, and the unit returns of $462 per contract and $0.26 per share are
well above our threshold for success. We can see from the jump in
average values that successful performance was concentrated in the last
three years.
TABLE 6.8 Performance of petroleum companies, from 2000 through
March 2010.
Removing the Low-Volatility Trades
Even with good results, we want to look further at what happens if we
remove the trades that are taken when price volatility is low. Taking fewer
trades means being out of the market more, and that avoids unnecessary
risk.
Using the ATR to measure the risk and then converting that to a
percentage of price was our way of generalizing a volatility filter. For the
mining and agricultural pairs, we found that a filter of 3.0% seemed to yield
a consistent improvement; therefore, the same method was applied to the
petroleum pairs over both the longer and shorter test periods. The results
are shown in Table 6.9.
TABLE 6.9 Results of oil company pairs using a low-volatility filter.
The averages show that filtering trades improved results in both periods.
While the ratios went up about 10%, the unit profits jumped considerably,
showing that the trades made during a low-volatility scenario returned
showing that the trades made during a low-volatility scenario returned
smaller profits. The best result would have been that the filtered results of
the longer period were as good as the unfiltered results of the shorter time
period, but that isn't the case. The period from 2000 to 2010 gave an
average ratio of 0.701, still lower than the 2007 to 2010 unfiltered period,
which gave 1.060. Because the filtered method does not use hindsight, it
is more likely to be realistic.
Comparison of Energy Profits
There are four cases that have been under the microscope with regard to
energy pairs:
1. January 2000 through March 2010 with no filters.
2. January 2000 through March 2010 with a low-volatility filter.
3. January 2007 through March 2010 with no filters.
4. January 2007 through March 2010 with a low-volatility filter.
FIGURE 6.13 (a) Comparison of cumulative profits for energy companies,
January 2000 through March 2010, no filters, and (b) comparison of
cumulative profits for energy companies, January 2000 through March
2010, with a 3% low-volatility filter.
Of these combinations, performance from 2007 was far better because
it isolated the biggest moves in the history of the energy markets.
Visualizing the results are always useful, and Figures 6.13a, 6.13b, 6.14a,
and 6.14b show combinations 1 through 4. Figure 6.13a shows the long
period of sideways, slightly positive performance into 2006, followed by
more volatile, highly profitable returns through 2008 and mixed results
afterward. ExxonMobil is the best performer, followed by Chevron, with the
low end held up by Valero and Anadarko. Figure 6.13b used the same test
period but applied a low-volatility filter of 3%. Total profits are lower
because there are fewer trades, but those trades had higher unit returns
and a better average information ratio. Using a filter was better than taking
all trades.
FIGURE 6.14 (a) Comparison of cumulative profits for energy companies,
January 2007 through March 2010, no filters, and (b) comparison of
cumulative profits for energy companies, January 2007 through March
2010, with a 3% low-volatility filter.
The more recent three years are shown in Figures 6.14a and 6.14b.
Even though the pairs strategy had an outstanding performance during this
period, the filtered results were even better. This is easier to see in the
individual profit streams than in the previous tables. While many of the
returns start to decline in the last three to six months in the unfiltered
performance, many more continue to be profitable when the low-volatility
filter is used.
PORTFOLIO OF CROSS-MARKET
ENERGY PAIRS
Performance looks different when it's combined into a portfolio. No matter
how similar the markets and trades, there are always differences that
offset risk. When using futures, that risk reduction allows you to leverage up
the trading, but with stocks that's not the case. With stocks, you can only
bring the leverage down. Still, diversification will lower that risk, which may
lower your investment, freeing up capital for other investments.
For pairs trading in energy, we always took a position of 10 contracts in
crude oil and then found the number of shares of the stock that would make
the risk the same as crude oil. Once we calculate the shares, we know the
total exposure, the cost of the position. For this example, we will use the
results from February 2010.
To trade one contract of crude oil, we need to deposit a margin amount
of $9,788. For those who don't trade futures, margin is a good-faith
deposit. If the position goes the wrong way, you may owe more. Margin is
roughly 10% of the contract value, so with crude at $75 per barrel, a 1,000-
barrel contract is worth $75,000. Margin tends to lag prices because it is
set by the exchange based on its board's perception of market risk. Even
at this level, your leverage is 7.6:1, which is far better than the stock
market, which is 1:1.
TABLE 6.10 Daily profits and losses trading energy pairs, February 2010.
The daily profits and losses from trading both futures and stocks are
shown in Table 6.10 . The pattern of positions should be a surprise.
Although the momentum for the crude leg is identical for each of these
stocks, the positions are remarkably different. There are only three days in
which five stocks had a position, February 8, 9, and 10, and on those days,
the stocks did not have all profits or all losses, as we might expect from a
highly correlated group. Fewer signals at the same time might mean that
you need less capital than the worst-case scenario, and different profits
and losses tell you that there will be a much greater benefit from
diversification than originally expected.
To calculate the portfolio investment size, we recorded the largest
position size and the corresponding entry price, then calculated the
exposure for each stock, shown in Table 6.11 . The largest position is
multiplied by the price at the time of entry, and the total cost is the
exposure. Not all positions were taken at the same time, so the table
shows the worst-case scenario. It also shows the total margin needed to
trade 10 contracts of crude for each of the nine pairs, where the margin for
one contract is $9,788. The total investment needed is then $964,504, or
$96,450 trading one contract of crude and a tenth the size for stocks.
TABLE 6.11 Exposure for each stock based on 10 contracts of crude oil,
February 2010.
TABLE 6.12 Daily returns and portfolio returns, with annualized volatility at
the bottom.
Using the investment of $964,504, the daily profits and losses can be
converted to daily returns, r(s)t, for stock s,
The daily returns for each of the nine pairs are shown in Table 6.12, with
the average return (the portfolio return) in the rightmost column. The
average implies that each pair was equally weighted. The bottom line,
marked volatility, is the annualized volatility. Note that the lowest volatility is
6.99% and the highest 18.5%, but the volatility of the portfolio returns is
only 5.75%, showing exceptional diversification. It is also important to
realize that the standard deviations of the returns of each pair have more
days with zero than with actual profits or losses. This reduces the standard
deviation so that the volatility of the individual pairs does not reflect the risk
on a day when you are trading, but the long-term risk. It may be more
accurate, and more descriptive, to include only the days when positions
were held (usually nonzero values) in the standard deviation calculation.
However, the financial industry doesn't do it that way; therefore, we'll use
the traditional method here.
Finally, we can calculate the NAVs for the month of February using the
standard formula
where Rt is the average daily return of all pairs. Table 6.13 shows the
returns and the final NAVs, and Figure 6.15 shows the corresponding
NAVs. Even a successful pattern of performance has both profitable and
losing days. The returns for February show a drawdown of 1.18%, even
while the month finished up 1.65%. Although this example showed only one
month, a volatility of 5.75% is quite conservative, and there is no way to
leverage that higher other than to borrow money, a tactic not generally
recommended. In Chapter 7, we see that when trading only futures,
leveraging up is a simple process. Implementing this strategy using
options may also allow more flexibility.
OTHER OPPORTUNITIES
Good traders and good technicians are constantly searching for new
opportunities. Many of these come when prices or volatility moves to
extremes, attracting participation from the mainstream investor. It is well
known that volatility attracts volume. Oil and gold are just the examples
used here. It's not possible to say how long these opportunities will last, but
there will be others to follow.
During 2007 and 2008, the profits of the airlines seemed to be inversely
related to the price of crude oil. Also, the price of gold appeared to be
reacting to the drop in the U.S. dollar, in particular the EURUSD. Gold is
also attractive when investors feel threatened. The grain markets even
began to react to the loss of value of the dollar and were gathered together
TABLE 6.13 Portfolio returns and NAVs for February 2010.
Date Portfolio Return NAV
1/31/2010 100
2/1/2010 0.00452 100.452
2/2/2010 −0.00365 100.086
2/3/2010 −0.00185 99.901
2/4/2010 0.00513 100.414
2/5/2010 0.00904 101.322
2/8/2010 0.00212 101.536
2/9/2010 −0.00177 101.357
2/10/2010 0.00326 101.687
2/11/2010 0.00022 101.710
2/12/2010 0.00168 101.880
2/16/2010 −0.00271 101.604
2/17/2010 −0.00190 101.410
2/18/2010 −0.00432 100.972
2/19/2010 −0.00098 100.873
2/22/2010 −0.00093 100.779
2/23/2010 0.00107 100.887
2/24/2010 −0.00186 100.700
2/25/2010 0.00603 101.306
2/26/2010 0.00343 101.654
FIGURE 6.15 NAVs for energy pairs, February 2010.
into commodity funds to protect investors against rampant inflation. The
most popular of these is the Goldman Sachs Commodity Index (GSCI).
Even if these opportunities last only six months, they are sources of
trading profits. The next ones may come when the equity market begins its
next rally or the U.S. dollar weakens due to the inflation that will inevitably
follow the government bailout and recovery program. We might suddenly
realize that the demand on energy far exceeds the supply, or investors
again feel that gold is no longer a convenient inflation hedge. And while
this program uses only closing prices, there are many more intraday
opportunities if this method is applied to 15-minute or hourly data.
SOME FINAL NOTES
All trading methods benefit from diversification, and short-term strategies
tend to show differences more often than longer-term approaches because
they are more sensitive to smaller changes in price moves, resulting in
more frequent entries and exits. The cross-market strategy can produce
different signals when crude oil is measured against different petroleum
companies, but it is far better to incorporate both oil and metals
combinations in the same portfolio. Agribusiness pairs or airlines can also
be added. If the commodity markets differ, then the portfolio will gain
important diversification.
As with any mean-reverting method, trading at different times of day will
increase the opportunities. Markets are more likely to be out of line during
the day and come back together on the close. They are also likely to
diverge after economic reports or earnings reports. Those are valuable
opportunities.
The limiting factor in the cross-market pairs is the inability to increase
leverage. This is not the case when using only futures. Other than
borrowing funds or using options, selecting more volatile periods to trade
seems to be the best alternative.
1. This method was first introduced in the January 2009 Futures
magazine, “Crossover Relative Value Trading,” by Perry Kaufman.
Chapter 7
Revisiting Pairs Using the Stress
Indicator
Having introduced the stress indicator in the previous chapter, we would
like to look at the most important pairs that were discussed in Chapter 4,
“Pairs Trading Using Futures,” this time using the stress indicator to
generate signals. These are equity index and interest rate futures, both
very liquid sectors offering good opportunities for pairs trading. We will find
that the results using the stress indicator are very different from the original
momentum difference calculations.
FUTURES MARKETS AND THE
STRESS INDICATOR
In Chapter 4, we used the difference between two stochastic momentum
indicators to generate pairs signals for pairs in equity index and interest
rate futures markets. The results were successful but showed that a
combination of U.S. and European markets is necessary to produce
sufficient profits, rather than just U.S. markets. The correlation between
most U.S. markets in either sector is too high, and few trades are
generated. Those signals that were produced did not have enough profit to
overcome normal commission costs.
In Europe, there is enough difference between the economies,
especially if you include Britain, to produce profitable pairs trades in most
equity markets, but there is less choice and higher correlations with
interest rates. That still leaves a large number of pairs in markets that are
highly liquid and have virtually no counterparty risk. Unlike a stock, which
can surprise you any day with an announcement of gross mismanagement
or fraud, a stock futures index or 10-year government bond doesn't have
that problem. The failure of a single stock in the S&P 500 is not a disaster,
and the clearing corporation for the Chicago Mercantile Exchange or
Eurex has never had a default and has substantial funds and contingency
plans to avoid investor losses due to nondelivery or other forms of
counterparty risk.
The stress indicator is a simple manipulation of the two momentum
values calculated for leg 1 and leg 2 of the pair. By taking the difference in
the two values and using those numbers to create a third momentum
indicator, we change the dynamics of the trading signals. Essentially, the
signals are more uniform and the concept is more generalized, perhaps
more robust. However, just like the original momentum values, the stress
indicator does not consider volatility. In fact, all sense of volatility is lost
during the process. This means that we might need to add a volatility filter
in order to take only those trades with the potential for larger returns;
otherwise, during a low-volatility period, we could be trapped taking many
trades without the possibility of profits exceeding costs.
The following sections compare the original method using the
momentum difference with the more generalized stress indicator. A
detailed description of the calculations needed to create the stress
indicator can be found in Chapter 6.
EQUITY INDEX FUTURES
We had considerable success using the momentum difference for index
markets, but a more generalized solution is always best. By converting the
final momentum differences using the stochastic formula, we know that any
value near 100 is overbought, and values near zero are oversold. The
stress indicator will also handle relative changes in volatility differently.
We ran a few simple tests using the stress indicator, shown in Table 7.1 .
The first test used a calculation period of 4 because that was found to be
the most effective for the momentum difference method, and because the
shorter calculation periods capitalize on market noise. After $25 costs
were applied, the results were quite good, showing small net returns per
contract for leg 1 and larger returns for leg 2. An information ratio of 1.521
and annualized returns of 18% were very acceptable.
TABLE 7.1 Stress indicator tests for equity index futures. The top four
tests vary the calculation period but leave the entry levels the same. The
bottom test uses a volatility filter to find trades with larger per contract
returns.
However, the average number of trades per pair, 347, was much higher
than expected. Over the 4.5-year test period, November 2005 through
March 2010, that comes to 77 trades per year, or a new trade every 3.25
days. That seems fast although not necessarily wrong. Still, it would be
better if there were fewer trades and larger profits per contract. Note that
this is a very different problem than with stocks, when we couldn't get
enough trades with sufficient profits.
To accomplish this, tests were run with longer calculation periods: 5, 7,
and 10. When selecting these numbers, we keep in mind that the
percentage difference in the calculation periods that we test is important,
even with a small sample. Moving from 4 to 5 is a 25% increase, 5 to 7 is a
40% increase, and 7 to 10 is a 42% increase. While these are large gaps,
going from 9 to 10 is an 11% increase, which is disproportionately small.
Given the small numbers and simple test, increasing the space between
periods gives the best representation of the method's performance profile.
The next three tests show a steady decline in the number of trades and a
comparable increase in the returns per contract. The fourth test, using a
period of 10 days, shows a 55% drop in the number of trades but an
increase in per contract returns from an average of $140 to $151, a gain of
only 7%. While increasing the calculation period showed that the results
were stable, or robust, it did not accomplish our goal of significantly
increasing the profits per contract.
Volatility Filter
Another way to reduce the number of trades is to apply the volatility filter
that was used in Chapter 3. It simply calculated the average true range
over the same period as the momentum calculation, divided by the price to
get a percent, and then ignored all trades that had volatility below that
threshold on the day of entry. Once the trade was filtered out, it could not
be entered at another time; the program waited for a new signal to enter.
We previously found that 3% was a good threshold number; therefore,
we applied only that one condition to the best of the results, the 7-day
stochastic calculation period. As shown in Table 7.1 , the filter did much
better, drastically reducing the number of trades from the original 213 to
83, a reduction of about 61%, and increasing the profits per contract from
an average of $155 to $208. Instead of trading nearly every 5 days, using a
filter reduced new signals to once every 13 days.
Comparative Results
It's important to compare results using all pairs, not just the best ones. An
improvement in a strategy should improve the losing pairs as well as the
profitable ones, even if the losing ones still remain negative. Otherwise,
you are focusing on a smaller and smaller set of results, making it far
easier to overfit the data.
Table 7.2 compares the results of the momentum difference method
from Chapter 4, the basic stress indicator, and the stress indicator filtered
with a 3% volatility entry threshold. As seen in the averages on the bottom,
the basic stress strategy had the highest ratio and annualized returns, but
more trades than we wanted. When we added the filter, the number of
trades dropped and the returns per contract increased substantially, while
the ratio dropped a relatively small amount, as shown in the panel on the
right. In some cases, the filter turned losses into profits, as with the SPDJIA
pair, but it also turned profits into losses, as with the SP-DAX. It may
look as though the numbers are jumping around, but Figure 7.1 shows the
ratios of each pair grouped together for the three methods. A fast glance
shows that the profitable pairs are all similar for the three systems; that is,
when one method posted a ratio of about 2, all methods did about the
same. The results that changed from plus to minus were all marginal
returns in the first place. There are no cases where the stress method
shows a ratio of 1.0 and the momentum a ratio of –1.0, a complete
reversal. It shows that we are dealing more with subtleties than with
structural changes in the strategies. Both are mean reverting, and both are
based on similar indicators. Still, we want to trade the strategy that gives
us the best chance of success.
FIGURE 7.1 Comparison of index pairs performance ratios using
momentum, stress, and filtered stress.
TABLE 7.2 Comparative results for index pairs using momentum, stress,
and filtered stress.


Correlations and Returns
In Chapter 4, we showed the relationship between the correlations of index
pairs and their return ratios. That relationship is repeated in Figure 7.2. It
shows a very clear inverse relationship between correlation and returns;
that is, as the correlation declines, the returns increase. Naturally, that is
not a relationship that exists normally, but it does when the pairs are
fundamentally linked to each other. The lower correlation shows
opportunity, and none of the pairs would have a correlation of zero. The
lowest correlation is about .40.
FIGURE 7.2 Relationship between correlation and information ratio for
index pairs using the momentum difference method in Chapter 4.
Figure 7.3 shows the same relationship using the stress indicator. While
it is similar to the chart produced using the momentum difference (Figure
7.2), the correlations clearly cluster into two groups. We can see why this
happens by looking at Table 7.3. All the pairs that have the CAC or FTSE
as one leg post the strongest returns and have the lowest correlations.
Knowing that, we can reason backward that the French and British
economies are very different from the German economy, which dominates
Europe and has greater impact on the EuroStoxx. This can be seen
because the correlation between the EuroStoxx and DAX is .955, similar
to the S&P and DJIA relationship. It is interesting that the top three
performers are all European pairs, although in the top two groups, most of
the pairs are combinations of U.S. and European markets.
FIGURE 7.3 Correlation versus information ratio for the index pairs using
the stress indicator.
TABLE 7.3 Index pairs sorted by correlations, showing the information
ratio.
A visual comparison of the cumulative profits always adds to our
information. In Figure 7.4, the results of the DAX-FTSE pair is shown for
the original momentum difference method, the stress strategy, and the
stress using the standard filter of 3.0. All three profit streams are similar.
The filtered stress results, shown as the horizontal line from mid-2006 to
mid-2007, also stops trading toward the end of 2009, where it is the
middle horizontal line. The momentum difference method does not trade
from mid-2009 until recently, when it starts again. These periods of low
volatility show the main difference between the three methods. The
unfiltered stress method will adjust to all volatility levels and continue to
generate trades when it finds relative distortion, even if it cannot produce a
profit after costs. By filtering those low-volatility periods, we get a more
profitable strategy, but one that was out of the market recently as volatility
fell to extreme lows.
FIGURE 7.4 Comparison of profits using the momentum difference, stress
indicator, and the filtered stress indicator for the DAX-FTSE pair.
The momentum method is fine-tuned but requires that both legs move
apart without the benefit of relative volatility. It filters trades much like the
filtered stress method.
Of course, we all prefer that a trading system generate trades through all
conditions and that those trades are profitable. However, that's unrealistic.
Each trading method targets a particular type of trade and market
condition. If it can do that consistently, even on a limited basis, it is a
success. It is then up to us to find other markets, or other strategies, that
work when these methods stand aside.
It is not necessary to go through the exercise of creating a portfolio of
pairs from the best of the index group. The DAX-FTSE pair had a ratio of
3.0, about in the middle of the group of 13 best performers. If we created a
portfolio from those pairs, it would look excellent, although the reliance on
the CAC and FTSE would limit diversification, increase risk, and require
that the portfolio is deleveraged to keep risk under control. It's a sacrifice
we can all live with.
INTEREST RATE FUTURES
Interest rate futures are among the most liquid markets, so any pairs
trading that works will be an important asset in a portfolio. As with the
equity index pairs, we will compare the results of the momentum difference
method in Chapter 4 with the stress strategy in Chapter 6.
Review of the Momentum Difference Method for
Interest Rates
For convenience, Table 7.4 is a recap of the momentum difference results
for 14 combinations of the U.S. 30-year bond, 10- and 5-year notes, the
Eurobund (maturity of about 10 years), Eurobobl (about 5 years), and the
U.K. long gilt (about 8 years). Results are reasonably consistent across the
selection of calculation periods and the one entry threshold of ±50.
However, for a period of 4.5 years, the number of trades, 22 to 31, is small
and causes the annualized returns to be low.
TABLE 7.4 Original momentum difference average results for interest rate
pairs, Chapter 4.
If we look at the results of the momentum difference method in more
detail, we see that performance increases as the correlation between the
two legs decreases. In Table 7.5 , the most correlated markets—the U.S.
interest rates—produced only 1 and 2 trades for the 10- and 5-year notes
when matched with the 30-year bonds and 10-year notes. The 30 and 5
pair, which has the greatest difference in maturity, posted 10 trades and a
good ratio.
TABLE 7.5 Results of the momentum difference for interest rate pairs are
dependent on the correlation of the two legs.
As we look down the table at the declining correlations, we see that the
biggest gains and the most trades come from pairs using the U.K. long gilt,
a longer maturity that allows larger price fluctuations and a market that
reflects an economy different from both the U.S. and European countries.
The losing combinations all seem to include legs with the shortest maturity,
the U.S. 5-year note and the Eurobobl. If we reason backward, one of our
better abilities, those markets would have the lowest volatility. If the bobl is
paired with the U.S. 30-year bond, the difference in maturity essentially
puts them furthest apart on the yield curve and offers the most opportunity
for profit, yet the information ratio was still low because the bobl leg would
be generating only small returns per contract.
From these observations, we will select a smaller set of pairs for trading.
We eliminate all pairs that use only U.S. markets and all pairs that use the
Eurobobl—not because the methods pick the wrong entry points, but
because, even with the best selection, the volatility of the pairs is not
enough to generate profits. The final selection is 7 pairs out of the original
14 pairs. The averages shown in the following examples will include both
all markets and the selected pairs. We want both those numbers to show
improvement to be comfortable with the results and our conclusions. Table
7.6 shows the results of the selected pairs for the same momentum
difference calculation criteria as Table 7.4 . All the numbers are far better,
although the number of trades is still fairly low, less than 10 per year for any
pair. Trading less often should not affect the returns per contract but will
lower both the absolute profits and the annualized rate of return. These
returns of about 8.5% are not bad, and the few trades mean that the
program is mostly out of the market and less exposed to price shocks and
unexpected risk.
TABLE 7.6 Results of momentum difference method for seven selected
pairs.
Results of the Stress Method
Turning to the stress method, results show a very different profile from the
momentum difference, even though the test criteria were comparable.
Table 7.7 is compared with Table 7.4. The main differences are:
The stress method had more than seven times the number of
trades.
TABLE 7.7 Results of the stress method for all 14 interest rate
pairs.
The total stress profits were large in two of three cases.
The stress returns were lower.
The stress ratios were lower.
The stress returns per contract were too low for comfort.
In previous analysis, selecting trades using a volatility threshold has
successfully raised these numbers to good levels. But before that step,
Table 7.8 shows the selected set of seven pairs that did not include U.S.
combinations and the Eurobobl. Clearly, the three criteria show greatly
improved performance. If we compare these results with the same
selection using the momentum difference, shown in Table 7.6 , we get a
very different opinion of the two methods. Now, the stress method still has
many more trades and, at best, twice the profits, a higher annualized
return, and a higher information ratio. The profits per contract are still
smaller but better than before.
TABLE 7.8 Results of selected pairs for the stress method.
To allow readers to form their own judgment, the detailed summary for
each pair, using the stress method with a 5-day calculation period and 95-
5 entry thresholds, is shown in Table 7.9 . These results include the U.S.
interest rate pairs, as well as all the Eurobobl pairs.
TABLE 7.9 Summary of results using the stress method for a 5-day
calculation period and entry thresholds of 95 and 5.
Volatility Filter
In the past, we were able to use a volatility threshold filter to select trades
that had, potentially, larger profits per contract. The threshold used for all
markets was a factor of the average true range of price movement divided
by the price, giving us a 3% threshold. The calculation period for the true
range was always the same as the momentum calculation period.
When that same approach was applied to the interest rate futures, there
were no trades! That is, the volatility of those markets is much less than
3%, so no trades qualified using that threshold. For example, a 3% move
in 10-year Treasury notes, now trading at about 116 (this implies a yield of
about 3.75%, where 100 is equivalent to 6%), would mean a move to
either 119-16 or 112-16, a move so large that it is without precedent.
Instead of 3%, the threshold was lowered to 1%—still a large move, but
more realistic. Using 1% generated from 3 to 4 times the number of trades
in the momentum difference method and increased the returns per contract
by up to 40% while lowering the ratios only slightly. A summary of results is
shown in Table 7.10.
TABLE 7.10 Summary of stress method for interest rates using a volatility
threshold of 1%.
Correlation of Momentum Difference and Stress
Methods
If we choose the 5-day calculation period for the momentum difference and
the 5-day period (filtered) for the stress indicator, we can look at the
cumulative profits to see whether the pattern of returns is similar. Figure
7.5 shows that they are quite different, with the momentum difference
returning infrequent but steady profits and the stress method showing a
strong run of profits from mid-2008 through mid-2009, after a decline at the
beginning of 2008. The correlation between the two profit series is .262,
indicating that there is at best a weak relationship between the pattern of
trading signals. It shows that a small change in technique, calculating the
stochastic of the difference, materially changes the strategy. We could take
advantage of that by trading signals from both methods. Figure 7.5 also
shows the result of equally weighting the two methods. As we would
expect, the result is better than either method, with a much smaller
drawdown than the stress method and much greater profits than the
momentum difference approach.
FIGURE 7.5 Cumulative profits for the U.S. 30-year bond–Eurobund pair
using both the momentum difference and stress methods, plus the
combined results of equal weighting.
A Portfolio of Interest Rate Pairs
Although we created a portfolio of futures in Chapter 4, it seems instructive
to go through that same process using the seven interest rate pairs. We
first start with the daily profit and loss streams at the inception, November
28, 2005, for each of the seven pairs. We align the data by date because
Europe and the U.S. do not always have the same holidays. Remember
that the strategy does not trade either an entry or exit if one of the equity
index markets is closed and just holds the positions until the next day on
which both markets trade; however, there is a change in the returns based
on the market that is open. If your data are forward filled, then a simple test
of whether the open, high, low, and close today are identical to yesterday
would be the same as recognizing a holiday.
Once the data have been prepared, you can accumulate the daily profits
and losses into a net profit stream to get a visual understanding of the
performance. The cumulative profits, shown in Figure 7.6, will not be used
in the calculations, but visual confirmation avoids simple errors. For
example, we can see that the filtering of trades resulted in very little trading
from the start of the data in 2005 through the middle of 2007. That was a
period of very low volatility; therefore, we need to be aware that the 1%
filter may keep us out of trading for long periods of time. Reducing the filter
size would allow more trades but probably reduce the size of the profits per
contract. Traders must decide what low threshold they can tolerate to
increase activity.
FIGURE 7.6 Cumulative profits for seven interest-rate pairs filtered by 1%
volatility.
Note also that the most recent data are also filtered, so that the
beginning of 2010 may be inactive. This situation is not likely to continue
once the central banks start raising rates, but continued concerns about
economic recovery and the brewing debt crisis in some European
countries might delay an increase in volatility. This is a normal trade-off in
the decision process—more activity in exchange for lower unit returns.
It may be tempting to start the portfolio in mid-2007, when volatility and
trading activity increased. That way, the annualized returns would be
maximized and look better. But that is ex post selection, making the
decision based on observing past data. In real trading, we will have
periods when trades are filtered because of low volatility, and we can't
erase those periods from our performance. It's not fair to do that now, so
our risk and returns will include all data.
TABLE 7.11 Annualized volatility of daily profits and total investment of
interest-rate pairs.
THE PORTFOLIO SPREADSHEET
We began with aligning the daily profit streams, a small part of the data
shown in Table 7.11 . These values have all been converted to USD at the
time of the trade so that no currency conversion is needed during the
portfolio construction process. At the bottom of each daily profit stream,
columns B–H, is the annualized volatility, calculated as
for column B, the 30-year bond and the Eurobund. The result is $80,465.
Doing the same for the other pairs and adding all seven gives a total
investment of $396,332. This may not be the final investment size because
there are other steps that increase or decrease leverage, but it is
necessary to have an investment size to calculate percentage returns.
Alternatives would be to arbitrarily pick the investment size or to use the
investment amount that you have in mind, and then the final numbers will
adjust to that investment and show the returns at your target volatility. That
will be seen as we move forward.
Using the investment of $396,332, we simply divide the daily profits and
losses by the investment size and post them in columns I–O, shown in
Table 7.12. Note that each return is divided by the total investment, not by
the investment needed for that one pair.
TABLE 7.12 Annualized volatility of daily profits and total investment of
interest-rate pairs.
The portfolio returns in column P are now the sum of the seven returns in
columns I–O. We again calculate the annualized volatility at the bottom of
column P and find that it is 63.9%, far above our target volatility of 12%. To
reduce that volatility, we need to deleverage by decreasing the position
size while keeping the investment the same, or by increasing the
investment size while trading the same number of positions. The factor at
the bottom of column P tells us that we would need to reduce our returns,
and our position size, to 18.8% of the current size to bring volatility down to
12%. That means, if we were originally trading 10 contracts, we need to
trade only 2. That's not good because we won't be able to balance the risk
of both legs with only 2 contracts, so the alternative of increasing the
investment size is better. Another alternative is to compromise and reduce
the position size by half, to 5 contracts, while increasing the investment
size by a factor of 2.5 instead of about 5. You must reduce position size,
increase the investment, or some combination in order to target the right
volatility.
The final step is to create the portfolio NAVs based on the returns in
column P and the volatility adjustment factor (VAF) of 0.188. Starting with a
NAV of 100 in column Q, the next entry is
The final NAV is 197.28 (there was a small amount of trading done after
March 3, 2010, resulting in a profit). That makes the annualized rate of
return 16.6% and, based on a target volatility of 12%, the information ratio
is 1.37, a good number. If you remember, this includes the inactive period
from November 2005 through mid-2007. If you lower the target volatility, the
ratio remains the same, but the rate of return drops proportionally.
SUMMARY OF PAIRS TRADING
Pairs trading has been covered for stocks, futures, and a combination of
both that we called cross-market trading. Overall, it has lived up to
expectations; that is, it found the right entry and exit points and often
returned a profit. It failed only when the volatility of the markets was too low
to overcome costs. That could be avoided by waiting patiently for volatility
to increase, but traders are not known for their patience. They want to trade
all the time.
Futures markets are more interesting than stocks because of both
higher volatility and the ability to vary the leverage. Futures trading
inherently allows high leverage, and you can tailor it to your personal level
of risk. Globalization has been a benefit to the spread trader because U.S.
and European markets are now open at the same time, although volume is
always highest during the business day in the location of the market being
traded, so European volume drops off after 10 A.M. in New York (4 P.M. in
Frankfurt). Still, there is enough volume to trade ahead of the U.S. close in
both zones. Even now, some Asian markets can be traded 24 hours on an
electronic platform, and arbitrage should be expected to increase. Volume
is understandably light in Singapore at noon in New York because it is 12
hours earlier. Most people trading in Singapore at that hour are U.S.
customers.
Opportunities for trading pairs surface and disappear, but some are
always there at any one time. It's not as profitable as it was 10 or 20 years
ago, but then we couldn't enter orders electronically, and fills were often
disputed. As we've made it easier to trade, the competition has also
increased. But that is just a challenge to stay aware and become more
technical about how you handle the opportunities and the decisions. Pairs
trading is fundamentally sound; it is the basis for the extraordinarily
profitable high-frequency trade. Unless all the stocks and futures markets
merge into one company, these opportunities are not likely to go away.
Chapter 8
Traditional Market-Neutral Trading
Any strategy that balances longs against shorts can be called market
neutral. It really means directional neutral, where you are not exposed to
the risk of outright price direction. You will be able to avoid being long
while the stock price is plummeting. It's well known that during uncertain
economic times, investors shift to larger, more secure companies, and
during boom times, they throw money at small-cap stocks. If that
relationship holds true and the economy is robust, you should be able to
generate a profit by buying the Russell 2000 and selling the Dow or S&P.
That profit would be the result of the relative gain of the Russell over the
Dow, regardless of whether the Russell and the Dow went up or down.
One of the greatest advantages of trading a market-neutral strategy is
that it is, for the most part, immune to price shocks. If you were long the
Russell and short the S&P on September 11, 2001 (volatility adjusted), the
losses in the long Russell position would have been offset by the short
profits in the S&P. You wouldn't have worried about how much you would
lose over the days when the New York Stock Exchange (and most of the
other exchanges) was closed. For example, when the markets reopened
on September 17, 2001, the S&P had dropped 4.98%, the Nasdaq
5.80%, and the Russell 6.51%. At the lows on September 21, the S&P was
off 15.8%, Nasdaq 14.0%, and the Russell 12.3%. Without considering
adjustments needed to correct differences in volatility, the exposure would
be small. Even leveraged up in futures, typically four times, the exposure
would have been smaller than the declines in outright long positions.
In this book, we have focused primarily on pairs trading. The advantages
are that you can choose a small set of markets and a modest investment.
In addition, the calculations involve only two stocks or futures markets at a
time and can be done on a spreadsheet. However, traditional marketneutral
programs are much broader, serve a somewhat different purpose,
and are not correlated to pairs trading, even when both methods are active
in the same sector.
This chapter will use similarly related stocks but apply a more general
hedging technique. We can then take this method and apply it to stocks
that are not closely related, and then to futures markets. The technique
used for both stocks and futures will be identical.
HOME BUILDERS
To keep the example of a market-neutral trading program as simple as
possible, and still learn as much as we can, the first choice will be the five
stocks in the home builders group that were used for the pairs trading
example: Hovnanian (HOV), KB Homes (KBH), Lennar (LEN), Pulte
(PHM), and Toll Brothers (TOL). The correlations between these stocks
can be found in Table 8.1. With pairs trading, we were able to return better
than $0.14 per trade; therefore, we have a benchmark to judge the
success of the market-neutral approach.
TABLE 8.1 Cross-correlations for home builders, 10 years ending March
2009.
TREND OR MEAN REVERSION?
If you have a set of stocks and plan to go long some of them and short
others, it is necessary to decide whether you take a trending position or a
mean-reverting one. Do you believe that those stocks that are stronger will
stay stronger and those that are weaker will stay weaker than others in the
same sector? If we think back at the major trends, it is easy to remember
Enron. Once it started down it kept accelerating. More recently, the
financial stocks suffered the fastest, steadiest decline on record. We would
expect to have produced remarkable profits by selling the financials short
and buying everything else (well, maybe not housing) during the second
half of 2008.
If you don't believe that trends persist, then you may believe in the Dogs
of the Dow, a theory advocating that, with qualifications, the weaker
companies in the Dow Jones Industrial Average will cycle to become the
stronger ones in the near future. After all, they are all solid institutions and
just need to get past some short-term issues. At least that was true before
the summer of 2008.
How can we decide whether trend or mean reversion is the best
approach? For pairs trading, we automatically chose mean reversion,
buying when the spread was oversold and selling when it was overbought.
But there is always a choice. In Chapter 2, we discussed the level of noise
in most markets and how we might use that information. Of all markets
studied, the index markets were clustered together and represented the
noisiest sector. We also know that applying mean reversion to pairs
trading was profitable. The conclusion that was drawn from this was that
mean reversion was preferred for stocks and that shorter calculation
periods would emphasize the noise. One caveat, however, is that the
spread between two noisy stocks might not be as noisy. We'll need to
keep that in mind. In Chapter 5, we had a chance to apply a trend to some
pairs, but we tilted the game to our advantage by using longer calculation
periods, which emphasized the trending nature of some stocks and futures
markets.
Another way of deciding whether a trend or mean-reversion method is
best would be to find the profitability of a simple trend-following system on
these stocks. Although the market-neutral strategy profits from the spread
between two stocks, knowing whether the individual stocks trend might
make the decision simpler. We'll save that for the next example, applying
this method to all Dow components.
BASIC MARKET-NEUTRAL CONCEPT
The first step is to find a measurement that allows us to compare each of
the five stocks in the home-building group to decide which are stronger or
weaker. There are many ways to do this, and they may all prove to
generate similar results. One approach would be to use the same moving
average on all stocks, say 20 days, and then compare the 1-day change in
the moving average differences. That is done by looking at the change in
the moving average from the previous day, MAt – MAt– 1, or over n days,
MAt – MAt – n. Those stocks with the largest positive change are the
strongest; those with the largest negative change are the weakest.
Instead of a moving average, we'll use the slope of a linear regression
line. The regression line, the tool of choice for the econometrician, is
simply a straight line drawn through the past n daily prices. The slope is the
angle of increase or decrease of that line, and it's the same at any point on
the line; therefore, if St is a point on the line corresponding to day t, and St–
1 is the previous point on day t – 1, then St – St– 1 is the slope of that line.
Putting All Markets into the Same Units
Comparing the slopes of the lines through price points won't work unless
all of the stocks are expressed in the same units, in this case percent. For
example, if a stock priced at $10 went up $1 each day, the slope would be
$1. If another stock priced at $5 went up $0.50 each day, the slope would
be $0.50. If we compared those two stocks without converting to percent,
then the higher-priced stock would have the biggest slope and appear to
be stronger, when they are actually both rising at the same percentage
rate.
Prices are normalized by indexing, which is the same as converting the
raw price changes to percentages. Starting each series at 100, the next
index value Xt is:
where Pt is the current price and Pt– 1 is the previous price. When the
linear regression slope is calculated on each of the five converted home
builders, they can be readily compared. Remember that the indexed series
are needed only for finding the relative strength of the sector components.
When we calculate profits and losses, the original prices are used.
Relative Strength and Weakness
Having chosen to use the linear regression slope to compare the relative
strength of all stocks in a sector, we first converted each of the stock series
to percentage returns using indexing. The slope is now easily found using
the spreadsheet function slope(y, x), where y is the column of dependent
variables and the x is the column of independent variables.
Finding the slope of a price series requires only the prices. The
independent variable, x, is actually the time. We would use the date for the
xs except that stocks don't trade on weekends, and there would be gaps
every five days. Instead, we just use the integer sequence 1, 2, 3, … , n for
as many days as needed in the calculation. For this strategy, we'll use n =
10 and apply it to the cash S&P 500 index, or SPX. Table 8.2 shows an
example of the slope calculated using Excel. The first valid calculation is in
cell D10 and is =slope(B1:B10,C1:C10), giving the result –4.60. That means the
SPX is declining at an average rate of 4.60 points per day over the past
10 days. Over the next four days, the index drops even faster, as seen in
column D.
TABLE 8.2 Example of a 10-day linear regression slope calculation
applied to SPX.
The slope can be programmed directly using the formula:
where x is an integer sequence (as in column C) and y is the price
(column B). The term x-bar ( ) is the average of the x.
Ranking and Choosing Which Markets to Trade
It's time to do some of the calculations and be more specific about the
trading rules. Table 8.3 shows the first day of calculations beginning
January 10, 2000. The date and the stock symbols are shown in row 1. The
next rows are:
Price, the current price of the stock.
TABLE 8.3 The five home builders showing the calculations
needed on day 1 of the first two days.
Xprice, the indexed price.
Slope, the value found by using a linear regression.
Rank, the order of stocks when sorted by slope, strongest (1) to
weakest (5).
Shares, the number of shares traded.
Chg pos, the change in the number of shares (used for
calculating costs).
Returns, the daily returns in dollars.
Cum ret, the cumulative returns in dollars.
Ho me builders suffered the brunt of the economic downturn; therefore, it
will not be surprising that the period we are using, from 2001 to May 2009,
shows wide, volatile price swings. Figure 8.1, repeated from Chapter 3,
should be a good reminder.
FIGURE 8.1 Prices of five home builder stocks. All five react in a similar
manner to the economic changes.
Ranking on Day 1
Table 8.2 shows the prices of the five stocks in row 2 (price) and the
corresponding index value in the row 3 (xprice). The index prices started at
100 on January 2, 2000, but Pulte had already dropped more than 12% by
January 13 and Lennar had gained more than 13%. Stocks trading at low
prices often move in surprisingly large percentages. We'll see the same
phenomenon at the end of the test period, when prices drop back to these
levels with increased volatility. While volatility is generally good for meanreverting
programs, volatility also means risk and must be treated carefully.
We calculate the slope using an 8-day period in order to have enough
data to smooth the direction but not too much as to cause a sluggish
reaction to price changes. We also keep in mind that a mean-reverting
strategy should only hold a position for a short time, looking for a fast
correction in relative price distortions. The longer the holding period, the
greater the risk. We have the advantage of knowing that a 7-day period
performed well in tests that will be shown later.
Row 4, slope, clearly reflects the direction of the past few days and is
consistent with the change in the index value from its start at 100. Pulte,
which lost 12%, has the steepest downward slope, while Lennar, which
gained 13.5%, is the strongest. Toll Brothers and Hovnanian, with their
index value still near 100, fall in the middle.
Selecting the Specific Stocks to Trade
Having ranked the five stocks, the next decision is which to buy and which
to sell short. With only five stocks and a mean-reverting strategy we have
two choices:
1. Sell the two highest-ranking stocks, and buy the two lowestranking
stocks.
2. Sell the single highest-ranking stock, and buy the single lowestranking
stock.
We choose the first option, buying and selling two stocks rather than one
stock. Although we have a very small group, four stocks (two pairs) offer
some diversification over a single pair.
The two stocks with the most negative slopes, Pulte and Hovnanian, get
ranks of 5 and 4, respectively, seen in row 5. The two most positive slopes,
although not as positive as the others are negative, are Lennar and KB
Homes, with ranks 1 and 2.
Basing the decision entirely on the rank, we buy Pulte and Hovnanian
and sell short Lennar and KB Homes. We do not take a position in rank 3,
Toll Brothers.
Number of Shares to Trade
Keep in mind that the fundamental purpose of a market-neutral program is
to be risk neutral; that is, the risk of the long positions must equal the risk of
the short sales. Otherwise, when the market makes a uniform move up or
down, you are not protected.
There are two accepted ways to balance the risk:
1. Trading equal dollar amounts for each stock.
2. Volatility adjusting the position size.
We start with the first option because it is commonly accepted on Wall
Street—and far easier to calculate. Allocating equal dollar amounts to
each stock relies on the loose but generally valid premise that volatility
increases as price increases. Although this is generally true, the specific
volatilities of two stocks trading at the same price could vary by as much
as 50%. If one stock is in the news and the other is under the radar, then
the visible stock normally experiences a short-term surge in volatility.
Stocks at very low prices also have erratic volatility, often much larger
than those stocks trading at higher prices. It was not surprising to see
Bank of America (BAC) or Well Fargo gain 25% near the bottom of the
financial crisis in early 2009. A jump from $3.00 to $3.75 is a large
percentage for one day, but still a small gain after a drop from above $50.
Figure 8.2 shows the path of BAC during the recent financial crisis, and
Figure 8.3 shows the corresponding annualized volatility based on a 20-
day calculation period. Volatility reaching 250% is unheard of and can be
sustained only over short time periods; however, this surge of volatility, in
excess of 100%, is now approaching one year. This unusual scenario
makes any measurement of volatility subject to problems but is an
opportunity to prove that a strategy can survive under stress.
FIGURE 8.2 Bank of America showing increased volatility at lower prices.
FIGURE 8.3 Bank of America annualized volatility increases as prices
drop.
The initial investment for this strategy is $10,000. We will always trade
four of the five stocks; therefore, each stock will get an allocation of
$2,500. On day 1, we calculate the number of shares to buy for Pulte as
$2,500/$3.87 (the closing price) or 646 shares, rounded down. For KB
Homes we get $2,500/$7.31 = 342, Hovnanian $2,500/$3.09 = 809, and
Lennar $2,500/$2.44 = 1,025.
We also apply the transaction cost of $0.005 per share. That gives the
cost of selling short 1,025 shares of Lennar as $5.12, which is shown only
in dollars in Table 8.3 ; however, the cents are accumulated in the returns.
As you will see, transaction costs are very important because the returns
per share are typically small for market-neutral strategies in the stock
market and the changing of positions may make it difficult to apply costs
afterward.
Day 2
At the end of day 1 we have 2 longs and 2 shorts, each committed with
$2,500. At the end of day 2 we will do the following:
Update the prices.
Calculate the next index value (see Table 8.4).
TABLE 8.4 Day 2 of calculations.
Find the 8-day slope of each index series.
Rank the stocks according to their slope.
Choose the two strongest markets to sell short and the two
weakest to buy.
Determine the number of shares by dividing $2,500 by the
current price.
Enter orders based on the difference between yesterday's
positions and today’s.
Calculate your profit or loss for each stock as the shares held
yesterday (“+” for long and “–” for short) times today's close
minus yesterday's close.
Subtract the cost of trading applied to the difference of today's
position size and the previous day's size.
On day 2, the stocks kept the same relative strength; that is, Pulte and
Hovnanian remained the strongest, Lennar and KB Homes the weakest.
Because the prices changed, the size of the positions changed. Lennar's
price increased; therefore, the number of shares dropped from 1,025 to
1,011. Because we were short Lennar, 14 shares are bought to reduce the
short position. Only three of the four stocks had small adjustments, but the
cost of trading is reflected in the PL. The net position lost $24 on day 2, for
a cumulative net loss of $38.
The Last Trading Day
Moving forward, the results of the last trading day are shown in Table 8.5 .
Prices have increased significantly for all but Hovnanian, although the path
between the start and end dates of this test was extreme. Hovnanian and
KB Homes are the strongest, and therefore they are short, while Pulte and
Lennar are the weakest and are long. The cumulative returns on the last
line 9 show that three stocks were net profitable and two losing, for a final
gain of $10,207. Based on an initial investment of $10,000 that's slightly
more than double over a period of about nine years and three months, a
simple return of 10.9% per year.
TABLE 8.5 Results of the last trading day, May 15, 2009.
When all the statistics are reviewed, we find that this strategy returned
only $0.013 per share, less than 2 cents, certainly not enough to be
profitable, even after costs of $0.005 per share. But then, making money
isn't easy.
Choosing the Critical Parameter
Up to now, we've referred to the 8-day slope calculation, used to rank the
indexed values. But the number of days used to find the slope is the critical
parameter for this market-neutral strategy. When the number of days, n, is
small, the slope jumps around but is responsive to relative changes in
price. As n gets bigger, the linear regression line is smoothed and the
slope becomes more stable, changing less often. The size of the returns
for each stock is directly related to the calculation period and the holding
time.
In Chapter 2, the concept of price noise was discussed. The conclusion
was that certain markets were noisier than others, stock markets being the
noisiest, and that shorter observation periods emphasized the noise. As
the calculation periods get longer, the prices are smoothed, and the trend
begins to show. Over the short term, say, 2 to 8 days, there is no trend, only
traders reacting to news and investors entering and exiting through large
funds not particularly concerned with market timing.
Because we've chosen a mean-reverting strategy, we'll test this strategy
for a range of calculation periods, from 3 to 10 days, to be consistent with
the concept of noise. The results, shown in Table 8.6 , are based on a
$10,000 investment, positions in 4 stocks (2 long and 2 short), and an
equal dollar allocation to each stock. The four columns show the number of
days in the slope calculation, the annualized rate of return (AROR), the
profits per share, and the return ratio (AROR divided by annualized risk).
This test covered 10 years ending May 15, 2009.
TABLE 8.6 Market-neutral basic test of the slope calculation period using
four stocks.
The results of this test have both good news and bad news. The good
news is that all tests are profitable, showing that the concept is sound. One
of the best measures of robustness is the percentage of profitable tests. In
this case, the test spanned the full range of calculation periods that seem
reasonable for a mean-reverting strategy; therefore, when all tests show
profits, we can conclude that the strategy is sound. As long as the
percentage of profitable tests is above about 70%, it would be considered
a success.
The bad news is that the profits per share, after taking out costs of
$0.005, peak at only $0.013, between 1 and 2 cents per share. That
doesn't leave much room for error, and the returns of about 6% don't make
this worth the risk. We'll need to explore some alternatives, remembering
that we were able to get more than $0.13 per share using pairs trading.
Filtering Low Volatility
The most obvious way to boost profits per share is to remove trades taken
when a stock is doing nothing. “Doing nothing” usually means that prices
are exhibiting very low volatility. We found this method successful for
various other pairs trading. The filter is based on a 10-day standard
deviation of the returns, expressed as a percent. The 10-day standard
deviation is annualized by multiplying by , which we've done before.
Unless the current volatility is above our threshold, no trades are entered.
Without a filter, the strategy returned 6.82% annualized and $0.013 per
share. The results of using the volatility filter are shown in Table 8.7.
TABLE 8.7 Using a volatility filter on the 8-day slope strategy.
The low-volatility filter is shown in whole percent in column 1. To keep it
simple, these tests all use the 8-day slope. When the 10-day annualized
volatility is below 1%, performance increases slightly to a return of 7.43%
and $0.015 per share. Notice that the volatility filter works as expected:
The AROR generally increases as the filter increases, and the profits per
share move from our no-filter case of $0.013 to a maximum of $0.063
when the filter is at 14%. The ratio also increases, showing that the lowvolatility
filter is a legitimate way to approach the problem. To confirm our
belief that the filter is working correctly, we plot the resulting NAV with and
without a 6% filter, shown in Figure 8.4. Having not seen the original NAVs,
we find it surprising that the strategy had a long declining period; however,
the volatility filter shows that the decline was the result of low volatility—
exactly the result we are looking for. The filtered results show a much
stronger performance at the end because both NAV series are adjusted to
12% volatility. If we leave them unchanged, then the original NAV series
would simply have no trades in the middle years.
FIGURE 8.4 Home builders original NAV and results using a low-volatility
filter of 6%, both adjusted to a target volatility of 12%.
Applying a volatility filter turned out to be very useful, but a profit per
share of slightly over $0.06 is still marginal. The $0.13 using pairs remains
more attractive. However, the filter has all the right characteristics and will
be used for other strategies to boost results. A filter has the added
advantage of reducing costs.
Quantizing to Reduce Costs
Another technique for reducing costs is to hold the same position size
unless that size changes by more than a threshold percentage. In
engineering, this method is call quantizing. For example, without the filter,
if we are long 1,000 shares of Lennar and the next day the volatility
declines by 5%, we would add 50 shares and be long 1,050. With a 10%
filter threshold, we would not add the 50 shares but wait until volatility had
dropped by 10%. There is a good chance that volatility will increase
tomorrow and we would just be resetting all or part of today's trade.
Instead, the volatility must change by at least 10% to trigger an additional
purchase or sale of 100 shares or more. This method won't be tested here,
but it is a common and successful way of minimizing trading costs.
Price Filters
Another filter that might increase returns per share is a simple price
threshold. A stock that falls under $2, perhaps even $3 or $4, might be
considered unstable. At low levels, prices make much larger percentage
moves than stocks trading at, say, $30 per share. This is particularly true if
it was once trading at a much higher price, such as Bank of America.
Removing the low-priced stocks from the mix might save both aggravation
and risk, along with some costs.
Trading Only the Extremes
In an effort to increase the profits per share, we must return to an earlier
decision to trade the two strongest and two weakest of a total of five
stocks. Instead, we'll trade only the extremes, the two stocks that show the
steepest positive and negative slopes. Naturally, trading a set of only five
stocks has its limitations. One of those limitations can be that none of the
stocks show enough volatility to generate sufficient profits per share. With
a larger set of stocks, we might get both diversification and volatility.
The first step is to repeat the basic test of various linear regression
calculation periods, this time only going long the one weakest stock and
short the one strongest stock. We are sure that the profit potential is
greatest for this pair, but we don't know by how much. By limiting the
number of stocks trading, we also expect the risk to increase. In this case,
we have removed all chance of diversification. The results are shown in
Table 8.8.
TABLE 8.8 Home builders mean-reversion strategy using only the two
stocks with the strongest and weakest slopes.
Compared with the results of using two longs and two shorts, these are
clearly better. The average AROR, profits per share, and ratio for the
earlier test, using four stocks (Table 8.6 ) were 6.70, $0.0107, and 0.558.
The averages for these tests are 7.99, $0.0152, and 0.666. The ratios are
much higher and very stable, showing that we have improved the risk
profile. Unfortunately, the best per share return is only $0.022, a 69%
increase, but still too low.
When applying the low-volatility filter to the 2-stock case, we again see
that the numbers are better, but not as much of an increase as we saw
when we used two longs and two shorts, a total of four stocks. The results
are shown in Table 8.9 . The best returns per share are not as large as
when we used two longs and two shorts, and the averages are all
marginally lower.
TABLE 8.9 Applying the low volatility filter to the 2-stock case.
VOLATILITY-ADJUSTING THE
POSITION SIZE
At the beginning of this chapter, we discussed two ways of calculating
position size. The first was allocating equal dollar amounts to each stock
and then dividing by the current price to get the number of shares. This
relied on a general relationship that volatility increases as price increases.
This general risk relationship is not very accurate because some stocks
trading at about the same price can be much more volatile than others. In
this section, we'll find the volatility of each stock and adjust them so they
have the same risk. In addition, we'll be sure that the net long positions
have the same risk as the net short positions, in the event there are an
uneven number of longs and shorts.
We feel strongly that this is the correct way to size positions. At the
same time, we hope that this increases the profits per trade. Even if it
does not improve returns, there is a clear element of chance introduced
when you trade equal dollar amounts of each stock. If you can fix the
problem, you are obligated to do so.
Beginning again on day 1, this time the annualized volatility is calculated
over the same 8-day period that is being used for the slope. The
annualized volatility is the standard deviation of price changes over the
calculation period multiplied by the square root of 252 for annualization.
Row 5 of Table 8.10 shows PHM at 0.624, an annualized volatility (AVOL)
of 62.4%. When we use a very short calculation period, the annualized
volatility can exceed 100%, but over a long period, even these numbers will
volatility can exceed 100%, but over a long period, even these numbers will
average out to the same value as those using a longer-term calculation
period.
TABLE 8.10 Calculating the number of shares from the volatility.
The steps for finding the number of volatility-adjusted shares follow, and
the values associated with each step are shown in Table 8.10.
Calculate the 8-day standard deviation of price changes for
each stock, i.
Calculate the annualized volatility for each stock as
Create a volatility adjustment factor, VAF, for each stock equal
to your target volatility divided by the annualized volatility:
where the default target volatility is 12%. Note that this
inverts the volatility so that markets with higher volatility will get
smaller allocations. Actually, the target volatility can be any
number such as 1, which will invert the annualized volatility.
Later, we will scale this to the investment size.
Set VAFi to negative if the position is to be short (highest
ranks).
Normalize the volatility factors by finding the sum of the long
factors, LFV, and the sum of the short factors, SVF. Then divide
each of the long factors in (4) by LFV and the short factors by
SFV.
TABLE 8.11 Step-by-step process for finding volatility-adjusted
share size.
6. Calculate the number of shares for each stock as
In row 6 of Table 8.11 , the investment of $10,000 is divided
by 2 in order to get the amount allocated to only longs or shorts;
then the number of shares for PHM is
In Table 8.11 we show the number of shares rounded up, but in the
actual trading strategy, we truncate the number of shares to avoid
exceeding the investment size.
TABLE 8.12 Day 2 calculation and performance detail for home builders.
If we compare the number of shares from this volatility-adjusted method
with the equal dollar allocations (from Tables 8.3 and 8.10), the numbers
are sufficiently different. PHM is only half the equal dollar method, and HOV
is more than 20% different. This difference should be enough to change
the final outcome.
On the second day, the stocks that are long and short remain the same,
but the position size changes slightly. This can be compared to day 2 using
the equal dollar method, shown in Table 8.12.
In the end, using the volatility-adjusted position sizes seems to be the
right method, but the annualized returns were 4.45%, and the per share
profit was only $0.008, less than the approach using equal dollar
allocations. We'll need to look further.
ARBING THE DOW: A LARGE-SCALE
PROGRAM
A large-scale market-neutral program trades a basket of long positions
against a basket of short sales. Our example of only five stocks in one
group is not a fair indication of its success. When you have many markets,
there should be bigger divergences and more volatility among the stocks.
This will lead to larger profits. The previous small example was just an
exercise to show how a market-neutral program is constructed and traded.
One important point to remember is that pairs trading uses a timing
device, some form of momentum indicator to find relative differences.
We've used both a simple stochastic difference and the stress indicator.
Trades are not entered until that indicator reaches an extreme, which
provides entry timing. Of course, that extreme could occur under conditions
of high or low volatility. If it's low volatility, then the per trade returns would
be small, but over the entire period, entry prices will be at relative extremes
and average higher returns than methods that choose entry points more
arbitrarily. Pairs trading will also be improved by filtering out low-volatility
situations.
Market neutral has no timing. Each day, the slopes are calculated, and
the steepest slope is sold. If you use some other form of ranking, then the
highest-ranking stocks are sold. Although a mean-reversion entry benefits
from timing, at no point did the market-neutral method try to decide if this
was a good place to sell or if the relative price of one stock was at an
extreme compared with its own history or the price of another stock. As
soon as one stock moved into the top zone, it was sold. If it continued to
strengthen relative to the other stocks, it would produce a loss rather than a
better opportunity for entry.
Success in market-neutral trading requires two key attributes: high
volatility if the method is mean reversion and a reversal in the strength or
weakness of one stock compared to the others. If trend following, then we
would want continued strength or weakness of each stock, keeping them in
the buy or sell zones.
Are the Dow Components Trending or Mean
Reverting?
We need to decide if the large-cap stocks in the Dow tend to move away
from each other, exhibiting trending, or whether they keep switching from
being in the strongest zones to being in the weakest, a mean-reverting
trait. We have two pieces of information to help us. If the Dogs of the Dow
work, then we should expect any large company that has underperformed
its peers to rotate back up to the top. To have stayed on the top,
companies such as Microsoft and General Electric seem to figure out how
to evolve.
More important, our study of price noise in Chapter 2 showed that the
stock markets in all developed countries exhibit a large degree of erratic
price movement. The equity index markets were the noisiest of all markets
and resisted profits based on trending methods. Most individual stocks
also show the same characteristics. Then mean reversion is the likely
scenario, and we'll take that approach.
Specifying the Rules of the Market-Neutral Method
To make this as transparent as possible, we will begin with the following
rules:
An investment of $100,000.
Equal investment in each of the 29 stocks, $3,448 (we found a
data error in one of the Dow components and removed it).
Buy and sell zones each with 13 stocks, a neutral zone with 3
stocks.
Cost per transaction of $0.005 per share.
We know that if we use a very short calculation period, then the trades
will all be held for a shorter time, and the returns per share will be small;
therefore, we tested periods of 5, 10, 15, and 20 days. Trading began on
January 11, 2000, and ended on June 18, 2010. Table 8.13 shows the
detail of calculations and positions on the second day of trading.
TABLE 8.13 Second day of trading the DJIA.

Table 8.13 is simply a bigger version of Table 8.12 , which showed the
home builders. The symbols are along the top and the rows are:
Stock price.
Stock index value (converted from price).
Linear regression slope using the index price.
Annualized volatility of price using the index.
Sorted rank based on the linear regression slope, where 1 is the
strongest stock.
If long, the size is the volfactor divided by the sum of the
volfactors of all long positions; if short, it is the volfactor divided
by the sum of the volfactors of all short positions.
Number of shares entered based on equal investment sizes.
Number of shares that changed from the previous day.
Returns, in USD, based on yesterday's position sizes and
today's price moves.
On the far right of part C are the total changes in shares and the total
profits or losses for the day.
Performance
When we test this method using the four calculation periods, we get the
results shown in Table 8.14. As with our other tests, these results would be
excellent if only the returns per share were higher. Considering that costs
have already been taken out, information ratios above 1.0 are very good,
and annualized returns are also attractive.
TABLE 8.14 Results of market-neutral trading using the DJIA for varying
calculation periods.
TABLE 8.15 Results using a 2 percent low-volatility filter.
FIGURE 8.5 Unfiltered results for market-neutral program.
We again fall back on the need for a volatility filter to increase the profits
per share. In this case, we found that a 2% filter was best. Smaller filters
improved the per share returns, but not by enough. Results of using the 2%
filter are shown in Table 8.15 . The slope period of 15 shows the highest
per share returns of nearly $0.10, with only a small decline in annualized
returns and information ratio. Figures 8.5 and 8.6 show the cumulative
profits of both the unfiltered and filtered tests for the four slope periods.
Performance is not very different for any of the calculation periods, and
using the filter eliminates trading for the four-year period in the middle of
the test. Again we see that mean-reverting strategies should not be traded
during periods of low volatility.
FIGURE 8.6 Results of the market-neutral program using a low-volatility
filter.
TABLE 8.16 Using only 8 stocks in the buy and sell zone, with and without
a low volatility filter.
There is still one last option to test, changing the number of stocks in the
buy and sell zones. By including 13 in the current test, we are not selecting
those stocks that might have moved further apart from the other stocks. By
reducing the number of stocks in each zone, we might add some element
of timing plus a higher average volatility. Instead of 13, we'll use 8. With 8
in each zone, we have 13 in the neutral area that are not traded. We won't
go to 4, 2, or 1 because we lose diversification and increase switching
costs, as the few stocks move in and out of the buy and sell zones. Results
are shown in Table 8.16. Although using 8 stocks has a slightly lower return
per share, it has an impressive improvement in both the annualized returns
and the information ratio. If we can produce the better returns trading fewer
stocks, then that's a better choice. The trade-off is that fewer stocks
present greater risk, regardless of what the numbers show.
THOUGHTS ABOUT MARKETNEUTRAL
TREND FOLLOWING
The statistics show that mean reverting is a better strategy for stocks in the
long term. However, we must all feel that there are times when that's not
true and those times could present higher risk. Ideally, if we could identify
when these markets are trending, then we might switch to a different
trading mode. This concept has been called regime switching.
Most regime switching has been unsuccessful, mainly because of the
lag needed to identify one regime from another. In addition, each time we
switch from trending to mean reverting, we would need to change all the
long positions to short and all the shorts to long. That can be a very large
cost unless you hold the positions long enough to make up the cost.
One criterion for making the switching decision would be the slope of the
equally weighted average of those stocks in the portfolio. If the slope is
nearly flat, then there is no dominant trend in the market, and mean
reversion would be the best choice. However, when the entire stock market
trends, and even the laggards in the Dow show a rising slope, then a
trending regime may be the way to make the most profits. At the same
time, to emphasize the trend, you would want to increase the calculation
period for the slope to 60 or 80 days. The longer the calculation period, the
more likely we'll see a sustainable trend.
Unfortunately, research is a never-ending process, and regime switching
won't be covered here. It is, however, an intriguing approach to improving
many trading programs.
MARKET NEUTRAL USING FUTURES
Futures markets would be an ideal venue for a market-neutral program.
There is high leverage and the ability to go long or short with no
restrictions. We discussed pairs trading for both equity index and interest
rate futures in Chapters 4 and 7; now we'll look at using a traditional
market-neutral method applied to interest rate futures.
The fixed-income futures markets are among the most liquid trading
vehicles in the world. Eurodollar futures alone trade an average of 2 million
contracts per day, each contract having a face value of $1 million, for a
total notional value of $2 trillion. The 10-year Treasury notes, considered
the benchmark interest rate, trade more than 300,000 contracts each day
for a notional value of $30 billion. Entering and exiting do not pose a
problem, and there is even a modestly active after-hours market.
Unlike stocks, trading futures provides exceptional leverage. To buy one
contract of 10-year Treasury notes with a face value of $100,000, an
investor needs only $2,700 in margin. Note that margin for futures is not the
same as stocks. It is a good faith deposit and is based on the volatility of
the market, not the face value. At this time, the 30-year bond margin is
$4,860, the 10-year note margin is $2,700, and the 5-year note margin is
$1,755. A study of the volatility of these three markets will show that the
margin requirements closely parallel relative volatility.
It is important to understand margin because it provides extremely high
leverage, but few traders take advantage of the maximum levels. For
example, if June 2009 Eurodollars rates (to distinguish it from EURUSD
FX) are trading at 99.025, and the face value is $1 million, then every 1.0
move is worth $2,500 (only 25% of the value because it is a 3-month
delivery). The margin requirement is only $500. If you were long and the
price dropped 20 basis points, all your margin would be gone—a 100%
loss. And because margin is a good faith deposit, you are responsible for
any additional losses.
Most traders deposit 3 to 4 times the amount of margin, reducing the
amount of leverage normally to about 4:1. For our market-neutral program,
we will calculate how much money needs to be invested to target returns
reflecting 12% volatility. Unlike stocks, we will not find out that our
investment wasn't enough to buy all of the contracts that we need.
The contract size of each futures market presents problems for traders
with a small amount of capital on hand. In our example, we will track 9
markets and trade 4 long and 4 short. If each market requires a margin of
$1,000 per contract, then we need at least $8,000. If we want to
deleverage, and have reserves for losses, we should invest about 4 times
that amount, or $32,000.
But the strategy also requires that we volatility-adjust each position so
that they all have the same risk. From the margins for the 30-year, 10-year,
and 5-year rates given earlier, we can see that we would need to trade
approximately 3 of the 5-year notes, 2 of the 10-year, and 1 of the 30-year
to have any similarity in volatility across markets. That means a lot more
margin. And unless we trade a large number of contracts and invest
millions of dollars, it will be difficult to fine-tune the size of the positions,
unlike the stock market, where you can add one share at a time.
With that in mind, let's look at the market-neutral strategy for fixedincome
markets. The process will be similar to arbing the Dow, but
perhaps simpler. We'll calculate position sizes differently.
The Rules for Mean-Reversion Trading with
Futures
When we applied pairs trading to both equity index and interest rate
markets, we found that all the profits were made when the pairs consisted
of one market from the U.S. and one from Europe. Keeping that in mind,
we chose those nine most active interest rates to include Eurodollars, U.S.
30-year bonds, U.S. 10-year notes, U.S. 5-year notes, Euribor, short
sterling, Eurobunds, Eurobobls, and the long gilt. Since 2005, these
markets close each day at the same time.
The other rules are:
An investment of $100,000.
2, 3, or 4 markets in the buy and sell zones.
A $50 cost per round turn for each trade in one futures market.
Th e gilt presents a problem because it closes one hour earlier than the
U.S. markets, but that could be resolved by posting prices for all markets
just before the gilt close or eliminating the gilt from the strategy. For now,
we'll leave it as part of the mix. Markets are usually very quiet in Europe
toward the end of the day. Although there still may be active U.S. markets,
the reality is that not as many European traders are interested in staying in
front of their screens until 10 P.M. That may change.
The contract size will play an important role in our ability to balance the
number of contracts to create equal volatility. It will also be used to
number of contracts to create equal volatility. It will also be used to
calculate the correct daily PL:
where signal is +1 for long and –1 for short, and the conversion factor is
the value of a 1 big point move in the futures market. For 30-year bonds,
the conversion factor is $1,000, representing the value of a move from, for
example, 115.00 to 114.00. Conversion factors are
Market Conversion Factor
Eurodollar rates $2,500
U.S. 30-year bonds $1,000
U.S. 10-year notes $1,000
U.S. 5-year notes $1,000
Euribor €2,500
Eurobund €1,000
Eurobobl €1,000
Long gilt £1,000
Many of these markets now have mini versions. These minicontracts
would have more flexibility for balancing the portfolio; however,
commission costs are not reduced in proportion to the contract size, so
trading the larger, original contracts whenever possible is more cost
effective.
At some point, we will need to deal with the currency conversion. Ideally,
we should know the currency rates on each day throughout our test history
and repatriate both euros and sterling back to U.S. dollars after the close.
We won't do that for these tests, but we can treat all non-U.S. trades as
though prices were always at the current rates of EURUSD 1.30 and
USDGBP 1.45. That is easily done by changing the Eurobund and
Eurobobl conversion factors to $1,300 and the gilt conversion factor to
$1,450.
As we did with the Dow, the second day of trading is shown in Table
8.17. All of the rows are the same as in the previous example except that,
instead of shares, there are contracts. The number of contracts may seem
large, but the correlations between these interest rates are very high, and
the risk of being long one and short another is surprisingly small. Because
of that, the profits are also small.
TABLE 8.17 Detail of the second trading day for interest rate futures using
two markets in each of the buy and sell zones.

Results of Interest Rate Trading
Interest rate differences correct very quickly, so the calculation periods
need to be short. We found that this was true when we first looked at pairs
trading in stocks. We also tried buy and sell zones with 2, 3, and 4
markets. Table 8.18 shows the information ratio (a), profits per contract
(b), and annualized rate of return (c) for these combinations. The lower
right corner of the table, the 4-day calculation period and only two markets
in each zone, is the best combination; however, most combinations were
good.
TABLE 8.18 Market-neutral results for interest rate futures showing the (a)
information ratio, (b) profits per contract, and (c) annualized rate of return.
The returns per contract, which are net of $50 round-term commissions
($25 for each leg although trading them as spreads will reduce that
amount), show a very safe margin of error for trading and make this an
attractive method. Given the results we had applying pairs trading to equity
index markets in both the U.S. and Europe, we would expect similarly good
results with those futures markets.
MARKET-NEUTRAL COMMENTS
Traditional market-neutral programs applied to stock sectors or industries
were the first of the major algorithmic trading methods. They profited
mostly during the 1990s, when competition was not as keen and markets
were less noisy. They took advantage of a new level of computing power
that had become more broadly available.
The principles of market-neutral trading, separating the strongest and
weakest stocks within a fundamentally related set and then either buying
the strongest and selling the weakest or, less often, selling the strongest
and buying the weakest, are still sound. Only now, we need to be more
selective.
Success in trading a market-neutral program can be in two areas: an
above-average interval of volatility in stocks or the cross-regional use of
futures. By far the best payout is in using futures. Both equity index and
interest rate futures offer profitable opportunities because globalization
has caused all of these markets to be linked, even if it might be seen as a
dirty link. They don't follow exactly, but they don't drift too far apart without
reacting back. That makes mean reversion the strategy of choice. With
U.S. and European markets now open at the same time, every investor
has an equal chance of profiting.
Chapter 9
Other Stat-Arb Methods
Stat-arb is short for statistical arbitrage, a traditional way of identifying and
profiting from price distortions in related stocks. We've used the term pairs
trading instead. For years, this was a bread-and-butter trade for the
institutions. They simply watched for companies within a sector to perform
differently from one another and then placed a trade that profited from the
two stock prices coming back together. It was just short of printing money.
Unfortunately for us, competition has become keen in every area of
trading, with stat-arb being a primary target. Any system that removes
directional risk and avoids the brunt of price shocks is in high demand. The
big investment houses have migrated their approach to high-frequency
trading, where even the proximity to the source of data gives one company
milliseconds of an edge against another. Some exchanges have just
recently required that users have their computers no closer than 500 feet to
the exchange transmission source. It's their attempt to even the playing
field. We can't compete in that venue, but there still are selected areas
where we can be profitable and have no directional risk. Some of the
primary opportunities have been covered in the previous chapters.
This chapter will look at a few different approaches to trades that don't
have directional risk. First we'll see what happens when we create our own
index and use that for one leg of the pair, or use one of the mutual funds
available from a number of different companies. Then we'll see if it makes
sense to create pairs from the components of the Dow or the S&P. We'll
also look at creating a market-neutral strategy from stock rankings
provided by companies that specialize in that service.
TRADE-OFFS
We can't know which combination of trading frequency, size of returns, and
risk that any one trader will choose. Some traders prefer risk avoidance;
others are risk seekers. That's a characteristic called investor risk
preference. In most of the approaches discussed in this book, we've taken
a centrist approach, trying to find the greatest common denominator.
Pairs trading is best when it's short term and mean reverting. All meanreverting
strategies have the same risk and reward trade-offs. If the entry
point is set closer, there are more trades with smaller profits. If the entry is
further away, there are fewer trades but larger profits per trade. As far as
risk is concerned, entering a trade sooner means you must hold the trade
with a larger open loss if it moves against you, but you will take smaller
profits more often. By entering at a point of greater distortion, you will not
suffer an unrealized loss that is as large, but you will need to wait longer for
each new trading opportunity. For our purposes we are interested in which
trade-off has the best return to risk ratio, which is our ultimate measure of
preference. A fast trading method may have smaller losses, but a series of
losses can be equally as large as a single, poor trade using a slower
system. The final performance for a mean-reverting method has the shape
of a short-options profile—many small profits and a few large losses. You
can't change this shape, although you can scale the leverage up or down.
SYSTEM BRIEFS
There are trading methods that are difficult to backtest, although they may
be perfectly thought out and fully systematic. For the first method discussed
in this section, taking advantage of upgrades, downgrades, and promotion
on the television or radio, the computer has not yet reached the level where
it can be substituted for the human brain. In the second method, the
availability of historic data is scarce and sometimes requires a hefty fee to
participate. Both are classic stat-arb trading methods, both are systematic,
and both can be very profitable.
Taking Advantage of Upgrades and Downgrades
We are all familiar with the daily market alerts on the financial news
networks that say “Microsoft has been upgraded from neutral to buy” or
from “buy to hold” (whatever that means) or occasionally from “neutral to
underweight” (rarely do they give an outright “sell,” even for Enron). Other
shows, such as Mad Money with Jim Cramer, cover a number of
companies with less tactful recommendations to buy or sell those shares.
Recommendations by large financial institutions, such as Bank of
America, influence many investors. Clients of Bank of America, J. P.
Morgan, or any other big investment house will have already received
those recommendations and acted on them. After all, it doesn't seem right
to offer the benefit of their research to the general public, without payment,
before or at the same time as their own clients. And Cramer fully discloses
that his recommendations may have been disseminated beforehand. None
of that is a problem. One web site where you can find upgrades and
downgrades posted each day is www.TheStreet.com.
Stat-arb trading triggers an action after the market has moved;
therefore, we want the recommendations to cause investors to stampede,
buying or liquidating en masse. While that's unlikely to happen, we would
be satisfied with a move in the target company that differed from the
market as a whole. It would be difficult to identify whether the buy
recommendation had investors rushing to acquire the stock if both the
target and the entire S&P index moved up by the same amount. Without
the recommendation, perhaps the company would have declined in price
while the rest of the market rallied; however, that's more difficult to
measure than if the company being recommended rose more than the
overall market.
Our stat-arb trade looks for moves in individual stocks that are clearly
stronger or weaker than the overall market, but only under three certain
conditions:
1. The move must be preceded by a visible recommendation by
a service, financial institution, or television show with a large
following.
2. It cannot be caused by a quarterly earnings report.
3. It cannot be caused by an announcement of a merger, scandal,
or major event internal to the company.
Note that we are looking for buying and selling recommendations, not
structural changes in the company or in the price of its stock. The impact
on the company share value must be temporary and inconsistent with the
movement of the market as a whole. A quarterly earnings report is a
structural change. If earnings are below expectations, then you can expect
that company to underperform the S&P index, but it does not provide an
opportunity to buy.
The premise of this traditional arbitrage is that analyst recommendations
are badly timed and have no lasting significance on price movement. A
buy recommendation pushes prices up as investors buy at the market,
without regard to getting a good price. And it always happens after the
fact. For example, Merck will announce that a new drug has passed the
next step in the FDA approval process. Prices rise. A few days later,
because prices have risen, an investment house recommends that its
clients buy. Of course, the recommendation is intended to take advantage
of the longer-term effect of the announcement, not a 2- or 3-day price
move. But the market has already moved up to discount the longer-term
move as best it can. Our best trade is to sell the rally for a very short-term
profit.
But what if we sell and the overall market is rallying due to generally
good economic news? That would mean we were right about Merck but
lost money anyway.
We can protect against that contingency by selling the S&P when we buy
Merck, volatility-adjusting the position sizes to be the same. That effectively
hedges the position and isolates the alpha. We make money only if we
were correct about the distortion of the Merck price and cannot have either
a windfall profit or loss because of moves in the overall market. Alpha
means that we make money if we're smarter.
These trades will be more obvious for smaller companies than for
members of the Dow. Even if Cramer recommends buying General
Electric, it is unlikely that a surge of buying will be seen in the price move.
The company is just too big. However, if he recommends a small-cap
company making hydrogen batteries, then it is very likely that we would see
a market impact. So the size of the company will make a big difference.
For larger investors, these smaller companies will have limited liquidity and
limited returns; however, results should be better.
The steps to follow for this classic stat-arb trade are:
Watch for all upgrades, downgrades, and other
recommendations to buy or sell given by investment houses,
research firms, or television reports.
Wait for the market to open stronger or weaker than the S&P,
confirming the direction of the buy or sell recommendation.
Normally, these recommendations are disseminated after the
close on the previous day.
Be careful to check that there is no news just released by the
target company that would cause a structural change in the
share price. This could be an earnings release, merger, change
of management, or other major announcement.
If the price is up, then sell the individual stock and buy the S&P,
being sure that you have correctly volatility-adjusted the position
sizes so that they have the same risk.
Take off the position when the stock gives back its gain or loss
relative to the S&P, but no longer than three days, perhaps less.
Do not substitute a sector ETF for the S&P. When one company in a
sector is upgraded, it is often the case that other companies benefit. For
example, when the first of the microchip manufacturers or computer
companies reports its quarterly earnings, the market takes that as an
indication of how the rest of that sector will perform. If Dell has an
unexpected rise in sales and its price jumps by 3%, it is very likely that
Hewlett-Packard will also rise.
Based on this sympathetic movement, it is possible to sell the sector
ETF and buy the S&P to capture the temporary move across a broader
range of companies. Of course, the move when averaged out will be
smaller for the sector than for the target company, but it still may be an
attractive trade. And arbing an ETF and S&P futures means that the
position can be leveraged and there are no awkward short sales.
Creating a Stat-Arb Trade Using a Rating Service
There are quite a few firms offering services that rank stocks in order of
expected performance. By searching the Internet, you can find “stock
rankings systems” or “stock ranking services” that are computer programs
you can buy or services to which you can subscribe. The best ranking
systems seem to have proprietary black box algorithms. They won't tell you
how they do it, but they will sell the rankings each day. Many other services
are free but require much more effort to rank stocks if you have more than
one criterion. This discussion is not intended to recommend any of these
services or assess which one is better than another. Part of the process of
generating a successful strategy will be to determine that yourself.
The intriguing part of a ranking service, or any ranking method, is that
you can find forecasts for both the best and the worst expected
performance. The stat-arb trade is created using the most actively traded
stocks and then buying the highest ranking stocks and selling short the
lowest ranking. This gives you a classic market-neutral portfolio. The only
calculation you must make yourself is to size the positions according to
volatility, so that the risk of all the long positions equals the risk of all the
shorts.
The hard part of this process is determining if the forecasts are credible.
That is, the minimum requirement is that those stocks that ranked in the
upper 10% should perform above average and those in the lower 10%
should perform below average. That doesn't seem to be a particularly
demanding requirement, but you cannot assume that it will happen. It may
be more reasonable to look at those stocks ranked in the top 80–90%
range, or even 70–80%, under the theory that the highest-ranking stocks
are experiencing an abnormal, short-lived period in the spotlight, while the
ones in a more modest position are the slow but steady performers.
Whatever you decide, you must prove that the rankings have forecasting
power before they can be used.
The problem of forecasting ability is particularly true if you are creating
your own ranking. Do you rank by the P/E ratio? By the size of the
dividends? By the recent or long-term performance? It may be interesting
to know that the U.S. government's Leading Economic Index (LEI)
includes many components, but the most important and most reliable is the
previous move of the stock market, for example, the S&P. If the S&P has
risen recently, then the LEI is likely to be positive. It may seem as though
it's a dog chasing its tail, but the point is that a rising stock price can be a
strong indicator of continued success.
Ranking for Hire
Value Line Publishing, Inc. has the oldest continuous ranking service,
initiated in 1965. They rank stocks by three qualities: timeliness, safety,
and technicals. They boast that the returns on their timeliness ranking are
in excess of 26,000% since 1965, compared with the return on the DJIA of
826%. Their web site posts a list of charges for their services.
Starmine (a Thomson Reuters company) is considered one of the highend
providers of analytic tools, as well as stock ranking. They offer
newsletters with “earning surprise forecasts” and those companies
expected to have material or structural changes in earnings. They target a
mostly professional clientele at a fee.
Other services, such as www.TheStreet.com, Cramer's Mad Money,
Reuters, and The Motley Fool (www.fool.com) provide both premium and
free stock ratings. Examples of the free services are shown in the next
section. It is worth repeating that claims of success are a normal part of
marketing a product, but whether you are buying a service or doing your
own ranking, you must prove that it works.
TABLE 9.1 Analyst recommendations provided on the MSN Money web
site.
Not Quite a Rating Service
If you can't afford to pay for a proprietary rating service, there are other
options. Many web sites allow you to sort stocks by one characteristic,
such as price/earnings ratio (P/E), but MSN Money offers a summary of
analyst recommendations. Table 9.1 shows 27 recommendations for
Microsoft on May 25, 2010, grouped from strongest to weakest, plus the 3-
month history of recommendations. The bottom line gives the mean
recommendation, which is interpreted as 1.0 = strong buy, >1.0 to 2.0 =
moderate buy, >2.0 to 3.0 = hold, >3.0 to 4.0 = moderate sell, and >4.0 =
strong sell.
This seems to be exactly what we would want. The only inconveniences
are that:
You must enter each stock individually and record its
recommendation in a spreadsheet.
You will need to develop a history of performance relative to the
recommendations to be sure that the best recommendations
bear some relationship to successful performance, or at least
fall in the upper 50% of performance of the candidates.
On the other hand, the price is right. MSN Money also has its
StockScouter Ratings, which have features similar to other services we
are discussing.
TABLE 9.2 From www.TheStreet.com rankings for airlines.
Symbol Equity Rating
ALGT ALLEGIANT TRAVEL CO B+
CPA COPA HOLDINGS SA B
HA HAWAIIAN HOLDINGS INC B
LFL LAN AIRLINES SA C+
LUV SOUTHWEST AIRLINES C+
TAM TAM SA C
GOL GOL LINHAS AEREAS INTELIGENT C
RJET REPUBLIC AIRWAYS HLDGS INC C
PNCL PINNACLE AIRLINES CORP C
JBLU JETBLUE AIRWAYS CORP C
Source: www.TheStreet.com.
TABLE 9.3 Jim Cramer's Mad Money daily stock calls (May 24, 2010).
In addition to access to the Jim Cramer Mad Money daily
recommendations, www.TheStreet.com provides both premium and free
recommendations, www.TheStreet.com provides both premium and free
ranking services. It provides individual stock rankings by sector, shown for
airlines in Table 9.2 , and Cramer's stock calls are shown in Table 9.3 . As
with many other services, how the rankings are arrived at is not disclosed.
TheStreet.com Ratings stock model compiles and examines all
available financial data on a daily basis to gauge stocks’
probabilities of moving up or down. The model scores stocks on
various factors—including growth, financial solvency, stock price
performance and volatility—which, when taken together, have shown
strong correlation with future stock performance. The aim is to
deliver investors with stock ideas that we feel have the best chance
at delivering top risk-adjusted returns.
Investor's Business Daily also ranks stocks. In an academic paper, “A
Test of the Investor's Daily Stock Ranking System” (Financial Review 33,
no. 22, March 9, 2005), Olsen, Nelson, Witt, and Mossman conclude that
“the best system provides market adjusted abnormal returns of 1.8% per
month.” While not free, the cost is not excessive.
Do-It-Yourself Ranking
The Morningstar Stock Quickrank offers a fully technical ranking approach
applied to the major equity sectors, stock funds, ETFs, and some other
investment vehicles. You can choose to rank by market cap, sales, year-todate
total return, dividend yield, return on equity, earnings growth,
price/earnings ratio, relative strength, and other features. Once selected,
you get a list of stocks as shown in Table 9.4.
TABLE 9.4 Sample of Morningstar's Stock Quickrank for all stocks, return
on equity.
Ticker Symbol Name Return on Equity %
NEGI National Energy Group, Inc. 244.19
FXEN FX Energy, Inc. 240.06
MRIB Marani Brands, Inc. 231.92
MARPS Marine Petroleum Trust 231.11
SPNG Spongetech Delivery Systems Inc. 230.45
TIRTZ Tidelands Royalty Trust 227.77
PAY VeriFone Systems Inc. 223.74
ARB Arbitron Corporation 216.63
IHG Intercontinental Hotels Group PLC 212.39
AH Accretive Health, Inc. 199.92
BJGL Beijing Logistic Inc. 198.76
AJGH American Jianye Greentech Holdings Inc. 196.74
LGBS Legends Business Group, Incorporated 196.36
SNSTA Sonesta International Hotels Corporation 195.48
SWKH SWK Holdings Corporation 194.00
PNGXQ PNG Ventures, Inc. 192.56
ESI ITT Educational Services, Inc. 184.17
IMMU Immunomedics, Inc. 183.92
WLSA Wireless Age Communications, Inc. 183.35
MILL Miller Petroleum, Inc. 181.59
Return on equity (ROE) measures a firm's return on shareholder investment (the
shareholders’ equity or the net worth of the company). ROE is a useful gauge in determining
how efficiently a company is using shareholders’ investment. Unlike return on assets, it
considers the amount and cost of the firm's debt.
Source: Morningstar.
The Morningstar ranking is similar to many others available on the
Internet. You can rank only one feature at a time, so you'll need to copy the
table and move it to a spreadsheet, which is allowed. Then you can give
each stock a ranking value, probably just a sequence number where 1 is
the best, 2 is next, and so on, and combine the rankings from various
attributes to get a composite score. Once that is done, you need to keep a
record of whether your ranking reflects the relative success of
performance.
MSN Money offers a similar service called StockScouter Ratings on its
web site. Enter a stock symbol, and you get a ranking from 1 to 10, with 10
being the best. You can rank sectors, but there are only a few factors to
choose from: fundamental, ownership, technical, and valuation. You can
also qualify the choices by various levels of capitalization. The actual
method of ranking is not disclosed, but then analyst rankings are also not
explained.
Rules for Using Ranking Systems
To summarize the use of ranking services:
Research the services that are available. Those that provide a
record of the success of past recommendations may be the
best place to start, but you will need to confirm those results
yourself or find a review from some other source with no conflict
of interest.
If you prefer to try to rank stocks yourself, then choose any of the
free services available on the Internet. Decide the sector(s) and
the criteria, and then rank the stocks daily. Transfer the rankings
to a spreadsheet for tracking.
Record the performance of those stocks in the ranking zone that
you've decided to track. That could be the top and bottom 10%,
or those in the 70–80 percentile range versus the 20–30
percentile range. The goal is that those stocks in the upper
range remain in the upper range and those in the lower range
remain lower.
Choose the stocks to be bought and sold. Calculate how many
shares of each stock are needed to have the same risk. This is
done by measuring the annualized volatility and then finding the
multiplication factor for each stock that brings the position size
to a common target volatility or risk.
Enter your positions.
Monitor the ranking and either hold the stocks for a
predetermined period based on your ranking success or
remove those stocks that fall out of your ranking zone, replacing
them with the new stocks that are now in that zone. Positions
must be volatility adjusted. To avoid switching too often, if you
are using a zone of 70–80, then switch when the stock falls
below 65 or 60. If it moves above 80, then all the better.
Similarly, stocks in the 20–30 zone are held below 20 but are
switched if they move above 35 or 40.
NEW HIGHS AND NEW LOWS
An interesting variation on a ranking arbitrage is to trade all stock prices
making new highs and new lows, buying the new highs and selling the new
lows short. At the extreme, this could be limited to historic (life of the stock)
highs and lows or modified to recognize 5-year or 2-year extremes. The
longer, the better. The idea is that stocks making all-time highs or lows
have something structurally good or bad happening, and this method would
profit from that trend continuing.
Once a position is set, you'll need an exit criteria. A reversal from the
high or low by 20% could work well. Each time you add or remove a stock,
you'll need to rebalance both sides of the trade. It may be important to
monitor the stocks making new lows to be sure they are moving; otherwise,
you will be leveraging them up in large numbers to offset the obvious price
movement in those stocks at the top. That presents two risks: The first is
event risk, where a low-priced stock reverses on high volatility. The second
is that you effectively trade only the longs, and the shorts offer no risk
protection.
MERGER ARB
Merger arb is an interesting area of trading that some traders consider to
be an arbitrage, but it's really not. We'll describe it here to remove any
confusion.
Merger arb is an arbitrage between the purchasing company (the
acquirer) and a to-be-acquired company (the target). This can be traded a
number of different ways.
The most successful arbitrageurs try to anticipate the acquisition. On the
one side, they know a company is not profitable because of debt,
overhead, some crisis (such as loss of crops or a tainted product), or a
temporary drop in demand that puts pressure on their cash flow. On the
other side, there might be companies such as IBM, Intel, or Berkshire
Hathaway that are looking to either complement their portfolios or add a
missing piece of technology to their services. The traders may buy an
option on what they perceive as the target candidate that pays off with
either higher prices or higher volatility, both of which happen when a buyout
or acquisition is announced. The trader who is correct about the acquired
company even one in five times gets a very big payout because the price
of that stock jumps to near the level of the acquisition price. At that point,
they may take their profits or join the second group of arbitrageurs.
The second group is more conservative. They wait until the acquisition is
announced and the board of directors has approved the deal. If the
acquirer is paying a 100% premium for the stock, say, $30 for a company
currently trading at $15, then the price jumps immediately to $28. The $2
difference is the uncertainty factor. If the market thinks the deal has a high
probability of closing, then the difference between the stock price shortly
after announcement and the target price is very small. If the market doesn't
like the deal, then the difference is large.
Some traders buy the target company and sell the acquiring company,
under the theory that the purchase adds to debt and uncertainty, thereby
lowering the price of the acquiring company. Although that may appear to
be a market-neutral trade, the movements of the two stocks are not very
predictable; therefore, there is no assurance that one move will offset the
other and reduce risk.
The greatest risk in a merger arb trade is that the deal falls through. This
most often happens when an audit of the company books produces
unacceptable surprises. More recently, it happened because tight money
made it impossible for some acquiring firms to borrow enough to close the
deal. At that point, the stock of the nearly acquired company collapses,
normally back to the preoffer price but many times much lower. The
company no longer has its anticipated support and, if it was losing money,
it might spiral into bankruptcy. A trader who has sold the acquiring
company may or may not benefit, but in the best of cases, the benefit
would never offset the loss of buying the target company near the target
price and then seeing the share price decline by half.
Although a merger arb program can have large risk, it is considered to
have a short options profile. That means there are many small profits from
successful deals closing and a few large losses. A merger arb program
typically generates a return of about 8% annually for investment houses
and offers a special type of diversification. Most deals close, so that the
large losses are rare and can be absorbed by the higher frequency of
small gains.
CREATING YOUR OWN INDEX
ARBITRAGE
If you can create your own stock ranking, can you also create your own
index and use it for an arbitrage? In the previous chapters, we've used
individual stocks and individual futures markets to create pairs. We've
looked at using ETFs as well with some success. An ETF is convenient
because there are no restrictions on short selling and it allows leverage. If
you substitute an ETF for the short sales in stocks, you reduce the returns
because the distortion in one stock is not reflected in the average of all
stocks. Instead of capturing the entry points where two stocks or futures
markets diverge, you are only capturing the point where one stock moves
away from the index. That may be only half the potential profit. During a
high-volatility period, that can still generate profits.
Selecting the two markets to use in the arbitrage can be done in a
number of different ways. Many traders test their strategy on a wide choice
of stocks and then pick the best performers. That's generally not a good
method because you may have overfit the data and squeezed profits out of
a few stocks by fine-tuning the parameter choices, which in turn identifies
entry and exit points. As we saw in the previous chapters, parameters that
are fine-tuned may work beautifully on one period of data but have too
many or too few trades during other time intervals, usually because of
changing volatility. If we are going to have confidence in a method, then it
should produce profits using an arbitrary set of related markets and a wide
range of parameters.
Another entirely statistical way of selecting the pairs is to find the
correlation in price movement of the two legs. Correlations that are over
0.90 reflect markets that are too similar and have little chance of a profit
that exceeds the cost of trading. Correlations below about 0.35 diverge for
extended time periods, thereby introducing a very large risk each time you
trade. Those markets with correlations of about 0.60 would be ideal,
provided it's not just a short-term effect. We've looked at cases where the
EURUSD and gold would be highly correlated for short periods due to
immediate concerns about inflation. Those are excellent trading
opportunities, but they can disappear quickly.
In the next section, we'll look at what happens if we create our own index
and use it as one leg of a pair. It's similar to trading one stock against an
ETF of that sector, when there is no ETF.
Mining Shares and the PMI Index
We were very successful trading pairs of gold, platinum, and copper
against the physical commodity in Chapter 6, but not everyone wants to
trade futures.
Gold is already familiar to us, and the precious metals sector has a
relatively small number of active stocks; therefore, it will be our starting
point. By looking at the Yahoo! web site, we can find the precious metals
(mining) stocks that are most active. They are shown in Table 9.5, in order
of volume.
TABLE 9.5 Six most active precious metals mining stocks.
Symbol Name Current Price
CDE Coeur d'Alene Mines Corp $0.63
ABX Barrick Gold Corp $28.76
NEM Newmont Mining Corp $38.90
AUY Yamana Gold Inc $8.70
GG Gold Corp $29.70
NG NovaGold Resources, Ltd $2.70
All other stocks traded fewer than 2 million shares per day. The
individual stocks’ price histories are shown in Figure 9.1. We create an
index that we call the PMI (Precious Metals Index) by equally weighting the
prices of the six stocks. That index is shown in Figure 9.2. It is easy to see
that the index tracks the rise and fall of precious metals prices in a way that
is even more exaggerated than the pattern of gold prices themselves.
Besides supply and demand, profitability of mining companies is sensitive
to operating margins, labor issues, and corporate management. At the
time this index was created, gold was above $900/ounce after touching
$1,000 (and on its way higher), and the PMI index is about 17 after topping
35, a drop of 50%.
FIGURE 9.1 Six precious metals mining stocks with the highest daily
volume.
FIGURE 9.2 Precious Metals Index (PMI), an equal weighting of six mining
stocks.
None of the six companies in the index was chosen based on suitability.
You might observe that Coeur d’Alene, CDE, shown as the bottom price
line in Figure 9.1, is far different from the other five stocks. It is also trading
at the lowest price and might be delisted from the NYSE. It has a large
business in silver, which might be reflected in the somewhat different price
pattern. Perhaps a better index could be created by paying more attention
to fundamentals, but our intention is to show that an arbitrage strategy
works on an arbitrary set of stocks and a simple index.
One way to see if the components are reasonable choices is to
calculate the cross-correlations, as shown in Table 9.6 . Low correlations
give us an idea that some of these companies are not affected by the
same factors. For example, CDE has a low correlation against all other
companies and only 0.163 against the index, while ABX, NEM, and GG
are all very highly correlated. Correlations that are this low can occur
randomly, but we expect that, being in the same sector, there is some
fundamental relationship between CDE and the other stocks. For that
reason, we'll leave it in this study because it may offer valuable
diversification.
TABLE 9.6 Cross-correlations of six mining stocks and the Precious
Metals Index, July 19, 2002, through March 6, 2009.
The Rules
As with the other steps that we've followed in previous chapters to identify
a trade, we'll follow a standard set of calculations and rules:
Standardizing the data so both the stock prices and the index
are in the same terms. That should be done by indexing.
Identifying the size of the entry distortion needed to capture
sufficient profits to overcome costs.
Trading different quantities of each in order to equalize the risk.
Deciding at what point to exit the trade.
Be cause the PMI is an average price, it can be treated in the same way
as each of the stocks in the index. We'll need to get the daily returns,
based on the prices, using
The return, rt, can then be used to calculate the annualized volatility
(AVOL) of the two series over the past 10 days, and the ratio of the two
volatilities gives the volatility factor, VAF, used to equalize the two series.
The 10-day calculation period is chosen because it is short enough to
reflect changes in volatility but long enough to have enough data to be
stable. Reducing the period to five days is tempting but would cause the
volatility to jump around. Many traders might find that using a 20-day period
is more in line with standards such as implied volatility or value at risk. With
a much longer period, such as 250 days, the volatility will change very
slowly and won't be responsive to some of the exceptionally volatile
periods we've seen during 2008 and 2009.
The volatility adjustment factor, VAF, will be used for determining the
number of shares to trade for every 100 units of the index. The position
size for one side of the arbitrage must be fixed, and the other is then
determined from the ratio.
Entry Points
Finding good entry points will be the most important step. For this, we
again use VAF to equalize the relationship between the index and stock
price. The basic way of finding distortions is by using the standard
deviation of the differences or, in our case, the returns. These will be called
the volatility-adjusted differences (VAD). We will also need the average of
the VAD values. This is different from previous methods that used a
momentum oscillator to identify extremes.
Both of these calculations, the standard deviation of VAD and the
average VAD, are based on only the past 10 days in order to be
responsive to changes in volatility. It is now time to choose a key
parameter, the standard deviation factor that determines how close or how
far away the entry points will be placed. We know from statistics that using
1 standard deviation will capture 16% of these distortions (the part
remaining on the outside of the distribution curve to the right). If we choose
2 standard deviations, we will only capture 2.5%, although those distortions
will be much larger. We're going to choose a value that is smaller, 0.5
standard deviations, with the intention of having many more trades but
enough profit to cover costs. Traders may decide to make this number
bigger or smaller depending on their own preference for trading frequency
and cost. If the standard deviation factor, F, is 0.5, the entry points are then
calculated as follows.
Buy the index and sell the stock if VAD falls below the previous value of
the average VAD minus the factor F times the previous value of the
standard deviation of VAD.
If
then buy the index and sell the stock.
If
then sell the index and buy the stock.
In both cases, buying and selling, the exit occurs when the current VAD
returns to the average VAD over the past 10 days. If the VAD values drift
during the time a position is held, results may be better or worse than
expected. There are no stop-losses and no maximum holding period. Risk
is reduced primarily by diversification and is naturally minimized because
there is no directional exposure.
Implementation and Liquidity
The size of the positions is determined by the volatility adjustment factor,
VAF. If we always trade 100 units of the index, then the number of shares
of the stock is 100 × VAF. Because we are using the PMI index that we
created ourselves, we would buy or sell 1/6 of 100 (16.67) shares in each
of the six companies in the index.
Selling short is always an issue, and not all stocks are available, so we
need to know in advance which companies can be readily sold. If they
cannot, they should not be part of the index. In this stat-arb example, we
haven't checked on the status of any of the companies. It is best that we
create the index, or trade the strategy, using the most liquid stocks, and
those stocks are most likely to allow short selling. They will also have
smaller execution slippage because they have a narrower bid-asked
spread.
Precious Metals Results
When we test the strategy on the six stocks for the 10 years ending March
2009, we get the results shown in Table 9.7 . All results are adjusted to
12% annualized volatility, meaning that one standard deviation of the stock
returns calculated over the entire 10-year period, times the square root of
252, will be 12%.
TABLE 9.7 Results of stat-arb using PMI and six mining companies, about
seven years.
Of the six stocks, four were profitable, with the average result showing a
return ratio of 0.284. There were nearly 100 trades per stock per year. The
two companies that posted losses, AUY and NG, did not trade during the
first half of the test period. The three stocks with the highest volume all
posted profitable returns. Remember that there are no costs taken out of
the results, and the stock trades posted a net loss of $0.0278 offset by the
index gains of $0.027 on higher volume. These are marginal returns even
for professional traders. Electronic trading can be done at very low cost,
but profits this small are a concern. The performance pattern of each
company can be seen in Figure 9.3. However, there is better news.
FIGURE 9.3 Performance of components and portfolio for the PMI
arbitrage.
First, there is the advantage of diversification. In Figure 9.3, two of the
stocks, ABX and NEM, continue higher during the last year while the other
four swing lower before beginning a recovery. If we combine the six NAV
streams into an equally weighted portfolio, the individual NAV volatility of
12% is reduced to 5.8%, less than half. This shows a significant amount of
diversification, considering these stocks all belong to the same narrow
industrial group. The final portfolio can then be leveraged back up to 12%
using a factor of 2.05, yielding an annualized return of 8.18% from July
2002, shown in Figure 9.4.
FIGURE 9.4 Combined performance NAVs of six mining companies
traded against the PMI.
Volatility is an important factor in arbitrage. It makes the distortions
larger and reduces the impact of costs. It should be no surprise that the
volatility of nearly all markets increased dramatically during the past two
years, and this is reflected in the performance. During that period, the
annualized return of the portfolio of six markets was 22.4%. The trading
profiles from January 1, 2006, are shown in Table 9.8 . We again see that
volatility is an ally of the trader.
TABLE 9.8 Performance of each mining company traded against PMI for
the period from January 1, 2006, through March 2009.
Even during this ideal time, NovaGold (NG) posted a loss. Remember
that it is currently trading at a very low price, which may make the absolute
size of the price moves small. We should understand that, given enough
time and hindsight, we can explain why one market lost and another
gained and convince ourselves that we should remove the worst
performers and keep the best ones. But we really don't know what will
happen in the future. As long as these companies qualify according to their
fundamentals or by their correlations, they should be included.
One caveat discussed in an earlier chapter concerned distortions in
positions. When one market trades at a high price with normal volatility and
another at a very low price with corresponding low volatility, the size of the
position taken in the low-priced stock would need to be much larger to
equalize the risk. This presents a real leverage risk, the possibility that any
surprising news involving the low-price stock could cause a very large loss
in those pairs using that stock. Our earlier conclusion (see the distortion
ratio) was that no pair should be traded if one stock has more than twice
the shares of the other stock.
Substituting a Mutual Fund for the PMI
There are some practical issues concerning the construction of our own
index. The strategy has been set up to trade 100 shares of the index and
the volatility-adjusted equivalent of each stock. If we are buying the index
and there are six companies, we then buy 16.6 shares of each. We need
to be able to sell short the other side of the trade. Because we chose
companies with the highest volume, we should have less trouble. If volatility
is high, as it's been during the past two years, there may be a choice of
using options; otherwise, the overhead might be too high.
One way to simplify the problem is to find an ETF or mutual fund for
precious metals. Either will track the cash price of the stocks. They have
the advantage of allowing long and short positions without penalty and
without size limitation. In the case of ProFunds, which offers a broad
selection of tradable mutual funds, the precious metals fund PMPIX is
twice leveraged and has competitive costs built into the transaction.
PMPIX is only a bull fund—that is, you can only go long—but there is a
large number of listings by SPDR, ProShares, Rydex, PowerShares, and
iShares that offer various combinations of long, short, and long-short funds.
We'll use PMPIX because ProFunds allows downloading historical data
easily; therefore, anyone can test strategies.
TABLE 9.9 Correlations of PMI and PMPIX with each of the six mining
stocks and with each other.
First we need to see how PMPIX correlates to our six mining stocks.
Table 9.9 shows that our six stocks are nearly identical, giving an overall
correlation of 0.981 with the mutual fund and showing only small variations
in the individual stocks. We can then test the six pairs of mining stocks with
PMPIX and get the results shown in Table 9.10.
TABLE 9.10 Results of six mining pairs using PMPIX, June 19, 2002,
through March 5, 2009.
Compared with Table 9.7 , these results are all better, and they should
also improve during the past three years. The net return was a positive
$0.03 per share, and the ratio improved from 0.284 to 0.301, which
includes the administration mutual fund fees, which are reflected in the
daily price. Overall, using a mutual fund, when it is available, is a better
choice and simplifies trading.
ARBING THE DOW
A natural next step might be to try this stat-arb process on the components
of the Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJIA) against that average. Those
companies are certainly more liquid and are all available for short selling.
In addition, the Dow trades as a number of ETFs, including the Diamonds
(DIA) on NASDAQ.
Without going through the tedious process of showing results, the
conclusion is that stat-arb does not work for the Dow and its components.
Consider that we need to find distortions in one stock with respect to the
index, and those distortions must correct quickly back to the average value
of the index. If all the stocks are part of the same industrial group, as we
tried to construct with precious metals, then the same fundamental factors
affect all of them. We have reason to believe that any news affecting one
company within the group will often have a corresponding, but not equal,
effect on the other stocks in the same group. In addition, when one
company has good news, it leads the index; then others follow as investors
buy the laggards in the belief that they will benefit from the same news.
The result of arbing all 30 Dow components against the index was
slightly worse than zero, a small net loss, even before costs were
subtracted. With the aid of hindsight, we can say that the Dow components
are a diverse group, and one component can keep going up, such as Wal-
Mart, while another is going down, as with Bank of America, particularly
during the financial crisis of 2008–2009. Buying Bank of America and
selling the DJIA would have resulted in a huge loss, only to be repeated by
other huge losses. In reality, half of the stocks generated a profit, and half a
loss, which indicates diverse fundamentals.
While arbing one stock against the index doesn't work, a very large
business exists in program trading, the process of keeping the cash stock
index in line with the futures market or other index markets that track,
primarily the S&P, and producing some trading profits along the way.
ARBING THE S&P 500— INDEX
ARBITRAGE
Index arbitrage is a subset of program trading and is an essential part of
market pricing. Professional traders track the cash S&P 500 index (SPX)
and the nearby S&P futures contract and wait for these two markets to
diverge. That often happens when a large pension fund or hedge fund sets
an outright position in S&P futures, driving the price up or down without
regard to the cash price. This may be an outright trade intended to be
profitable or insurance against existing positions. In addition,
recommendations by brokers or investment houses can cause the general
public to move back into the stock market, pushing up the actual stock
prices but not directly affecting futures.
Program trading is a pure arbitrage—a market-neutral program. If the
futures markets move up faster than the cash market, then traders will sell
futures and (theoretically) buy all of the stocks in the S&P in proportion to
the cap-weighted holdings in the S&P cash index. This brings the two
markets into equilibrium. If the cash market moves first, then they buy the
S&P futures and sell the stocks. Selling short all the stocks in the S&P
requires planning and adds considerable risk, so it is not nearly as
desirable as trading in the other direction. When a trigger point is hit,
program traders use computers to automatically generate and execute
orders to buy or sell all stocks in the S&P. Some traders try to use a
smaller set of stocks to represent the whole index, which, on one hand, can
save money and speed up execution but also introduces tracking risk.
It is estimated that all program trading, which includes index arbitrage
and algorithmic trading, accounts for nearly 50% of all volume trading on
the New York Stock Exchange. The exchange defines program trading as
a trade involving 15 or more stocks with an aggregate value in excess of
$1 million.
Trigger Points
The key to index arbitrage is finding the trigger point at which to activate
the trades and generate a profit. This is where the fair value of forward
price of the S&P component stocks differs from the futures price, or ETF,
or options price, by some minimum threshold. The fair value at time t is
calculated as
where FVt is the fair value at some future date, t days ahead, SPX0 is the
current value of the cash S&P index, RFt is the risk-free rate of return for
the calculation period, and Dt is the accumulated dividends of the S&P
components between now and t days ahead. Normally, t is chosen to
correspond to the delivery date of the futures markets, around mid-month
in March, June, September, and December. As the date gets closer, the
accumulated dividends get smaller, and the fair value approaches the cash
value of SPX. It is essential that futures and cash prices converge on the
delivery date because the futures delivery is in cash, and hedgers must be
sure that any shorts taken in futures to insure against cash stock market
losses do indeed perform as expected.
Traders typically look for the difference in the futures price and fair value
to exceed $5 or fall below –$5 to trigger a trade, but competition may
cause some traders to jump ahead of that threshold. Once a program
trade has been set, stocks and futures should converge within a short time,
but the worst-case scenario is that they converge at delivery. The sooner
they converge, the sooner traders have their investment back and can use
those funds for another trade. If stocks and futures take a long time to
converge back to equilibrium, the traders are effectively losing money.
Volatility plays an important role in triggering index arbitrage
opportunities. Volatility causes all markets to move quickly, often
independent of one another. At the same time, volatility attracts volume.
The combination assures that index arbitrage will come into play.
The S&P is traded in many ways, and all of them are subject to a similar
arbitrage to keep prices in equilibrium. There is also a large selection of
ETFs that mimic the S&P cash price. The best known of these is SPY
(“Spyders”), traded on NASDAQ, but a wide range of leveraged funds are
offered by ProShares, ProFunds, Rydex, iShares, and other financial
companies.
There are many variations on index arbitrage. It might be possible to sell
S&P futures and buy the SPY ETF, or buy S&P futures and sell SPY,
avoiding all the short-sale issues. Program trading is a big business, and
professionals hold a so-called book of positions in such a way that shortselling
can be done instantly. The elimination of the uptick rule and the
move to trading pennies instead of eighths have facilitated program
trading. The negatives are that, if the S&P drops more than a fixed
percentage in one day, all program trading is halted, an awkward situation
if you're in the middle of a trade. Also, competition has caused some
traders to select a smaller set of stocks to represent the S&P futures in
order to reduce costs and expedite the process. They might set the
arbitrage with marginal profit expectations just to enter sooner than other
traders waiting for bigger opportunities. It is a clear case of competition
improving the spread and liquidity of the market.
How Can We Participate?
If we're going to participate in this arbitrage, then the practical answer is to
choose a smaller set of markets that has an index that can be traded. Of
the futures markets, that would be the DJIA, which has 30 components.
Tracking the fair value of the Dow futures would be a straightforward
process on a spreadsheet. Each day you would change the number of
days to delivery and get a number that can be used all day to monitor
differences in the cash and futures prices.
On even a smaller level, you can calculate the fair value of single stock
futures and find a trigger point that makes that a profitable trade. While
others are out there looking at the same opportunities, taking a slightly
smaller profit and a slightly bigger risk may give you an edge.
About the Companion Web Site
This book includes a companion web site, which can be found at
www.wiley.com/go/alphatrading (password: alpha). There you will find a
series of six Excel spreadsheets:
1. An Excel spreadsheet showing the calculations needed for
creating a pairs trade made with two stocks plus trading signals.
You can enter your own signal threshold levels and costs to test
the results.
2. An Excel spreadsheet showing the calculations needed for
creating a pairs trade using two futures markets plus the trading
signals. You can enter your own signal threshold levels and costs
to test the results.
3. An Excel spreadsheet showing the calculation of the stress
indicator.
4. Two more Excel spreadsheets similar to (1) and (2) showing
pairs calculations using the stress indicator.
5. An Excel spreadsheet showing the calculations needed for a
crossover pairs trade, one stock and one futures market.
6. An Excel spreadsheet showing a simple portfolio of pairs (or
any assets), including volatility-adjusting.
About the Author
Perry Kaufman has 40 years of experience in financial engineering and
hedge funds, and is well known for his role in algorithmic trading.
Beginning as a rocket scientist in the aerospace industry, he worked on
the navigation and control systems for the Gemini project. Since 1971, Mr.
Kaufman has specialized in the development of fully systematic trading
programs in derivatives and equities, as well as risk management and
leverage overlays. During his career, Mr. Kaufman headed trading
operations for large firms and has partnered three successful hedge funds.
He is the author of New Trading Systems and Methods, Fourth Edition
(John Wiley & Sons, 2005), A Short Course in Technical Trading (John
Wiley & Sons, 2003), and other books and articles that have gained
worldwide acclaim.
Index
ADM cross-market trading
Algorithmic trading
Airlines, pairs trading example
Agribusiness pairs
American airlines (see Airlines)
Annualized volatility, formula
AROR, formula
Average true range (see True range)
Bank stocks, volatility distortions
Black box
Bonds, spread trading
Butterfly, gold
Capping the position size (see Position size)
Complexity (see Risk)
Contagion risk (see Risk)
Continental Airlines (see Airlines)
Copper, cross-market trading
Correlated price moves
Correlations
Airlines
Equity index performance
Energy futures
Energy-US dollar
Home builders
LME performance
Mining stocks
Correlations and common sense
Costs, trading
Quantizing
Counterparty risk
In CDs
Also see Risk
Cramer, Jim
Crisis, Financial
Cross-margining
Cross-market trading
Also see Stress indicator
Crossover trade, see Stress indicator
Crude oil
Cross-market trading
Price shocks
Data
Checking
Closing times
Holidays, correcting for
In-sample
Out-of-sample
Data consistency
Data driven
Dell, spread example
Deviation, percentage
Directional neutral, see Market neutral, Pairs Trading
Distortion ratio
Diversification
Also see Risk
Dow, arbitrage
Dow, market neutral trading
Equity index pairs, see Pairs trading
Energy cross-market trading
Energy pairs
Energy trading hours
Energy-US dollar correlation
ETFs
As one leg of a pair
Composition
Counterparty risk
For short sales
Risks
Euribor
Eurobund (see Interest rates)
Eurodollar rates, implied yield
European Interbank Offered Rate (see Euribor)
Exchange trading hours
Execution, order
Exposure, market
Also see Leverage
Exxon-Mobile, see Energy pairs
Fat tail
Filters
High distortion
Price
Skewness
Volatility
In energy
In equity index
In interest rates
In LME
In market neutral
In mining
Volatility threshold
Financial crisis
Price shocks
Fractal efficiency (see Price noise)
Fundamentals
Balanced with technicals
Futures contracts
Margin and leverage
Reviewed
Gold
Cross market trading
Implied yield
Inflation pairs, see Pairs trading
Ratio with silver
High-frequency trading
Holidays, correcting for
Home builders
Market neutral trading
Hovnanian (HOV), see Home builders
HP, spread example
Indexing
Implied yield
Eurodollar rates
Gold
Index arbitrage
Inflation, see Pairs, Inflation related
Inflation scares, trading
Information ratio
In-sample data
Interest rates
Eurobund price shocks
Futures, see Pairs Trading
Market neutral trading
Intraday trading
KB Homes (KBH), see Home Builders
Label risk
Leading Economic Index (LEI)
Lennar (LEN), see Home builders
Leverage
Equity index example
Varying
LME (London Metals Exchange) pairs, see Pairs trading
Long Term Capital Management
Low volatility filter (see Filter)
MACD
Mad Money
Mandelbrot, Benoit
Market neutral trading
Using the Dow
Using interest rate futures
Mean reversion
And price noise
Also see Pairs trading
Combined with trends
Comparison with trend
Merger arb
Mining cross-market trading
Mining pairs
Momentum difference method
see Pairs trading
see Stress indicator
Morningstar
MSN Money
Mutual funds, mining
NAV (see Net Asset Value)
Net Asset Value
Calculation
Noise (see Price noise)
Notes, spread trading
Out-of-sample data
Overfitting, avoiding
Pairs trading
Agribusiness
Airlines example
Comparison of momentum difference and stress
Energy
Equity index
Correlation versus performance
Using stress indicator
Home builders example
Low volatility filter
Parameter thresholds
Inflation related
Crude, gold, EURUSD
Interest rate futures
LME
Trending pairs
Mechanics using futures
Mining
Process
Using futures
Also see Stress indicator
Parameters, test, see Testing
Performance measurement (see Information ratio)
Platinum
Cross-market trading
Ratio with gold
Portfolio
Construction (Airlines)
Equity index example
Energy example
Home builders example
Interest rates
Position sizing
Capping excess exposure
Capping using ETFs
Market neutral
Precious Metals Index
Price noise
Determining the strategy
Efficiency ratio
Excel example
Fractal efficiency
For equity index markets
For selected markets
Importance of
Profit studies
Trend
Price shocks
Avoiding
During subprime crisis
Formula
Impact on trading
In crude oil futures
In S&P futures
In interest rate futures
Position bias
Program trading
Pulte Homes, see Home builders
Quantizing
Rating services, trading using
Ratio
Gold/silver
Platinum/gold
of prices
Regime switching
Relative differences
Relative value trading
Returns
zero-value distorting results
Risk
Black box
Calculating
Complexity
Contagion
Counterparty
ETFs
Futures
Directional
Reduction
Also see Diversification, volatility, portfolio
Robustness
RSI
Shocks (see Price shocks)
Silver, ratio with gold
Sizing (see Position sizing)
Skew, in parameters
Slope, used in market neutral
Southwest Airways (see Airlines)
Sovereign risk
Soybeans cross-market trading
S&P program trading
Spread risk
Spreads,
Dell and HP example
Risk-adjusted
Starmine
Statistical arbitrage
Dow arbitrage
Index arbitrage
Creating your own
S&P program trading
Merger arb
New highs and lows
Trade-offs
Also see Pairs trading
Stochastic difference
Also see Pairs Trading (examples)
Stochastic indicator
Stop-losses
Strategy (see Trading strategy)
Stress indicator
Comparison with momentum difference
Formula
Used for agribusiness cross-market trading
Used for energy cross-market trading
Used for equity index markets
Used for mining cross-market trading
Subprime crisis, (see Financial crisis)
Subprime disaster (see Financial crisis)
Target volatility (see Volatility)
Technicals, balanced with fundamentals
Term structure, see Yield curve
Testing
Exploring for a solution
LME parameters
Parameter selection
Specifying
Varying parameter values
Also see Trade-offs, Pairs Trading (examples)
TheStreet.com
Time perspective
Toll Brothers (TOL), see Home builders
Tracking risk
TradeStation
Trading
Habits in countries
Yield curve
Trading strategy
Costs
Determined by price noise
Merger arb
Using new highs and lows
Using rating services
Using upgrades and downgrades
Treasuries, trading the yield curve
Trend following
And price noise
Applied to Dell and HP
Combined with mean reversion
Comparison with mean reversion
LME pairs
Trend of price noise
True range, formula
Used for volatility
Uncertainty
US Airways (see Airlines)
Value Line
Volatility
Annualized, formula
Changing
Comparisons, crude, gold, EURUSD
Correcting for different
Distortion at low prices
Filters (see Filters)
Gold/silver ratio
Index (VIX)
In efficiency ratio
LME example
Measuring, Alternatives
Platinum/gold ratio
And price noise
S&P
Target,
defined
example
Also see Price shocks
Volume
Yield, implied (see Implied yield)
Yield curve trading